I am forced into speech because men of science have refused to follow my advice
without knowing why. It is altogether against my will that I tell my reasons
for opposing this contemplated invasion of the antarctic—with its vast
fossil-hunt and its wholesale boring and melting of the ancient ice-cap—and I
am the more reluctant because my warning may be in vain. Doubt of the real
facts, as I must reveal them, is inevitable; yet if I suppressed what will seem
extravagant and incredible there would be nothing left. The hitherto withheld
photographs, both ordinary and aërial, will count in my favour; for they are
damnably vivid and graphic. Still, they will be doubted because of the great
lengths to which clever fakery can be carried. The ink drawings, of course,
will be jeered at as obvious impostures; notwithstanding a strangeness of
technique which art experts ought to remark and puzzle over.
In the end I must rely on the judgment and standing of the few scientific
leaders who have, on the one hand, sufficient independence of thought to weigh
my data on its own hideously convincing merits or in the light of certain
primordial and highly baffling myth-cycles; and on the other hand, sufficient
influence to deter the exploring world in general from any rash and
overambitious programme in the region of those mountains of madness. It is an
unfortunate fact that relatively obscure men like myself and my associates,
connected only with a small university, have little chance of making an
impression where matters of a wildly bizarre or highly controversial nature are
concerned.
It is further against us that we are not, in the strictest sense, specialists
in the fields which came primarily to be concerned. As a geologist my object in
leading the Miskatonic University Expedition was wholly that of securing
deep-level specimens of rock and soil from various parts of the antarctic
continent, aided by the remarkable drill devised by Prof. Frank H. Pabodie of
our engineering department. I had no wish to be a pioneer in any other field
than this; but I did hope that the use of this new mechanical appliance at
different points along previously explored paths would bring to light materials
of a sort hitherto unreached by the ordinary methods of collection. Pabodie’s
drilling apparatus, as the public already knows from our reports, was unique
and radical in its lightness, portability, and capacity to combine the ordinary
artesian drill principle with the principle of the small circular rock drill in
such a way as to cope quickly with strata of varying hardness. Steel head,
jointed rods, gasoline motor, collapsible wooden derrick, dynamiting
paraphernalia, cording, rubbish-removal auger, and sectional piping for bores
five inches wide and up to 1000 feet deep all formed, with needed accessories,
no greater load than three seven-dog sledges could carry; this being made
possible by the clever aluminum alloy of which most of the metal objects were
fashioned. Four large Dornier aëroplanes, designed especially for the
tremendous altitude flying necessary on the antarctic plateau and with added
fuel-warming and quick-starting devices worked out by Pabodie, could transport
our entire expedition from a base at the edge of the great ice barrier to
various suitable inland points, and from these points a sufficient quota of
dogs would serve us.
We planned to cover as great an area as one antarctic season—or longer, if
absolutely necessary—would permit, operating mostly in the mountain-ranges and
on the plateau south of Ross Sea; regions explored in varying degree by
Shackleton, Amundsen, Scott, and Byrd. With frequent changes of camp, made by
aëroplane and involving distances great enough to be of geological
significance, we expected to unearth a quite unprecedented amount of material;
especially in the pre-Cambrian strata of which so narrow a range of antarctic
specimens had previously been secured. We wished also to obtain as great as
possible a variety of the upper fossiliferous rocks, since the primal
life-history of this bleak realm of ice and death is of the highest importance
to our knowledge of the earth’s past. That the antarctic continent was once
temperate and even tropical, with a teeming vegetable and animal life of which
the lichens, marine fauna, arachnida, and penguins of the northern edge are the
only survivals, is a matter of common information; and we hoped to expand that
information in variety, accuracy, and detail. When a simple boring revealed
fossiliferous signs, we would enlarge the aperture by blasting in order to get
specimens of suitable size and condition.
Our borings, of varying depth according to the promise held out by the upper
soil or rock, were to be confined to exposed or nearly exposed land
surfaces—these inevitably being slopes and ridges because of the mile or
two-mile thickness of solid ice overlying the lower levels. We could not afford
to waste drilling depth on any considerable amount of mere glaciation, though
Pabodie had worked out a plan for sinking copper electrodes in thick clusters
of borings and melting off limited areas of ice with current from a
gasoline-driven dynamo. It is this plan—which we could not put into effect
except experimentally on an expedition such as ours—that the coming
Starkweather-Moore Expedition proposes to follow despite the warnings I have
issued since our return from the antarctic.
The public knows of the Miskatonic Expedition through our frequent wireless
reports to the Arkham Advertiser and Associated Press, and through the later
articles of Pabodie and myself. We consisted of four men from the
University—Pabodie, Lake of the biology department, Atwood of the physics
department (also a meteorologist), and I representing geology and having
nominal command—besides sixteen assistants; seven graduate students from
Miskatonic and nine skilled mechanics. Of these sixteen, twelve were qualified
aëroplane pilots, all but two of whom were competent wireless operators. Eight
of them understood navigation with compass and sextant, as did Pabodie, Atwood,
and I. In addition, of course, our two ships—wooden ex-whalers, reinforced for
ice conditions and having auxiliary steam—were fully manned. The Nathaniel
Derby Pickman Foundation, aided by a few special contributions, financed the
expedition; hence our preparations were extremely thorough despite the absence
of great publicity. The dogs, sledges, machines, camp materials, and
unassembled parts of our five planes were delivered in Boston, and there our
ships were loaded. We were marvellously well-equipped for our specific
purposes, and in all matters pertaining to supplies, regimen, transportation,
and camp construction we profited by the excellent example of our many recent
and exceptionally brilliant predecessors. It was the unusual number and fame of
these predecessors which made our own expedition—ample though it was—so little
noticed by the world at large.
As the newspapers told, we sailed from Boston Harbour on September 2, 1930;
taking a leisurely course down the coast and through the Panama Canal, and
stopping at Samoa and Hobart, Tasmania, at which latter place we took on final
supplies. None of our exploring party had ever been in the polar regions
before, hence we all relied greatly on our ship captains—J. B. Douglas,
commanding the brig Arkham, and serving as commander of the sea party, and
Georg Thorfinnssen, commanding the barque Miskatonic—both veteran whalers in
antarctic waters. As we left the inhabited world behind the sun sank lower and
lower in the north, and stayed longer and longer above the horizon each day. At
about 62° South Latitude we sighted our first icebergs—table-like objects with
vertical sides—and just before reaching the Antarctic Circle, which we crossed
on October 20 with appropriately quaint ceremonies, we were considerably
troubled with field ice. The falling temperature bothered me considerably after
our long voyage through the tropics, but I tried to brace up for the worse
rigours to come. On many occasions the curious atmospheric effects enchanted me
vastly; these including a strikingly vivid mirage—the first I had ever seen—in
which distant bergs became the battlements of unimaginable cosmic castles.
Pushing through the ice, which was fortunately neither extensive nor thickly
packed, we regained open water at South Latitude 67°, East Longitude 175°. On
the morning of October 26 a strong “land blink” appeared on the south, and
before noon we all felt a thrill of excitement at beholding a vast, lofty, and
snow-clad mountain chain which opened out and covered the whole vista ahead. At
last we had encountered an outpost of the great unknown continent and its
cryptic world of frozen death. These peaks were obviously the Admiralty Range
discovered by Ross, and it would now be our task to round Cape Adare and sail
down the east coast of Victoria Land to our contemplated base on the shore of
McMurdo Sound at the foot of the volcano Erebus in South Latitude 77° 9′.
The last lap of the voyage was vivid and fancy-stirring, great barren peaks of
mystery looming up constantly against the west as the low northern sun of noon
or the still lower horizon-grazing southern sun of midnight poured its hazy
reddish rays over the white snow, bluish ice and water lanes, and black bits of
exposed granite slope. Through the desolate summits swept raging intermittent
gusts of the terrible antarctic wind; whose cadences sometimes held vague
suggestions of a wild and half-sentient musical piping, with notes extending
over a wide range, and which for some subconscious mnemonic reason seemed to me
disquieting and even dimly terrible. Something about the scene reminded me of
the strange and disturbing Asian paintings of Nicholas Roerich, and of the
still stranger and more disturbing descriptions of the evilly fabled plateau of
Leng which occur in the dreaded Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred. I
was rather sorry, later on, that I had ever looked into that monstrous book at
the college library.
On the seventh of November, sight of the westward range having been temporarily
lost, we passed Franklin Island; and the next day descried the cones of Mts.
Erebus and Terror on Ross Island ahead, with the long line of the Parry
Mountains beyond. There now stretched off to the east the low, white line of
the great ice barrier; rising perpendicularly to a height of 200 feet like the
rocky cliffs of Quebec, and marking the end of southward navigation. In the
afternoon we entered McMurdo Sound and stood off the coast in the lee of
smoking Mt. Erebus. The scoriac peak towered up some 12,700 feet against the
eastern sky, like a Japanese print of the sacred Fujiyama; while beyond it rose
the white, ghost-like height of Mt. Terror, 10,900 feet in altitude, and now
extinct as a volcano. Puffs of smoke from Erebus came intermittently, and one
of the graduate assistants—a brilliant young fellow named Danforth—pointed out
what looked like lava on the snowy slope; remarking that this mountain,
discovered in 1840, had undoubtedly been the source of Poe’s image when he
wrote seven years later of

“—the lavas that restlessly roll
Their sulphurous currents down Yaanek
In the ultimate climes of the pole—
That groan as they roll down Mount Yaanek
In the realms of the boreal pole.”

Danforth was a great reader of bizarre material, and had talked a good deal of
Poe. I was interested myself because of the antarctic scene of Poe’s only long
story—the disturbing and enigmatical Arthur Gordon Pym. On the barren shore,
and on the lofty ice barrier in the background, myriads of grotesque penguins
squawked and flapped their fins; while many fat seals were visible on the
water, swimming or sprawling across large cakes of slowly drifting ice.
Using small boats, we effected a difficult landing on Ross Island shortly after
midnight on the morning of the 9th, carrying a line of cable from each of the
ships and preparing to unload supplies by means of a breeches-buoy arrangement.
Our sensations on first treading antarctic soil were poignant and complex, even
though at this particular point the Scott and Shackleton expeditions had
preceded us. Our camp on the frozen shore below the volcano’s slope was only a
provisional one; headquarters being kept aboard the Arkham. We landed all our
drilling apparatus, dogs, sledges, tents, provisions, gasoline tanks,
experimental ice-melting outfit, cameras both ordinary and aërial, aëroplane
parts, and other accessories, including three small portable wireless outfits
(besides those in the planes) capable of communicating with the Arkham’s large
outfit from any part of the antarctic continent that we would be likely to
visit. The ship’s outfit, communicating with the outside world, was to convey
press reports to the Arkham Advertiser’s powerful wireless station on Kingsport
Head, Mass. We hoped to complete our work during a single antarctic summer; but
if this proved impossible we would winter on the Arkham, sending the Miskatonic
north before the freezing of the ice for another summer’s supplies.
I need not repeat what the newspapers have already published about our early
work: of our ascent of Mt. Erebus; our successful mineral borings at several
points on Ross Island and the singular speed with which Pabodie’s apparatus
accomplished them, even through solid rock layers; our provisional test of the
small ice-melting equipment; our perilous ascent of the great barrier with
sledges and supplies; and our final assembling of five huge aëroplanes at the
camp atop the barrier. The health of our land party—twenty men and 55 Alaskan
sledge dogs—was remarkable, though of course we had so far encountered no
really destructive temperatures or windstorms. For the most part, the
thermometer varied between zero and 20° or 25° above, and our experience with
New England winters had accustomed us to rigours of this sort. The barrier camp
was semi-permanent, and destined to be a storage cache for gasoline,
provisions, dynamite, and other supplies. Only four of our planes were needed
to carry the actual exploring material, the fifth being left with a pilot and
two men from the ships at the storage cache to form a means of reaching us from
the Arkham in case all our exploring planes were lost. Later, when not using
all the other planes for moving apparatus, we would employ one or two in a
shuttle transportation service between this cache and another permanent base on
the great plateau from 600 to 700 miles southward, beyond Beardmore Glacier.
Despite the almost unanimous accounts of appalling winds and tempests that pour
down from the plateau, we determined to dispense with intermediate bases;
taking our chances in the interest of economy and probable efficiency.
Wireless reports have spoken of the breath-taking four-hour non-stop flight of
our squadron on November 21 over the lofty shelf ice, with vast peaks rising on
the west, and the unfathomed silences echoing to the sound of our engines. Wind
troubled us only moderately, and our radio compasses helped us through the one
opaque fog we encountered. When the vast rise loomed ahead, between Latitudes
83° and 84°, we knew we had reached Beardmore Glacier, the largest valley
glacier in the world, and that the frozen sea was now giving place to a
frowning and mountainous coastline. At last we were truly entering the white,
aeon-dead world of the ultimate south, and even as we realised it we saw the
peak of Mt. Nansen in the eastern distance, towering up to its height of almost
15,000 feet.
The successful establishment of the southern base above the glacier in Latitude
86° 7′, East Longitude 174° 23′, and the phenomenally rapid and effective
borings and blastings made at various points reached by our sledge trips and
short aëroplane flights, are matters of history; as is the arduous and
triumphant ascent of Mt. Nansen by Pabodie and two of the graduate
students—Gedney and Carroll—on December 13–15. We were some 8500 feet above
sea-level, and when experimental drillings revealed solid ground only twelve
feet down through the snow and ice at certain points, we made considerable use
of the small melting apparatus and sunk bores and performed dynamiting at many
places where no previous explorer had ever thought of securing mineral
specimens. The pre-Cambrian granites and beacon sandstones thus obtained
confirmed our belief that this plateau was homogeneous with the great bulk of
the continent to the west, but somewhat different from the parts lying eastward
below South America—which we then thought to form a separate and smaller
continent divided from the larger one by a frozen junction of Ross and Weddell
Seas, though Byrd has since disproved the hypothesis.
In certain of the sandstones, dynamited and chiselled after boring revealed
their nature, we found some highly interesting fossil markings and
fragments—notably ferns, seaweeds, trilobites, crinoids, and such molluscs as
lingulae and gasteropods—all of which seemed of real significance in connexion
with the region’s primordial history. There was also a queer triangular,
striated marking about a foot in greatest diameter which Lake pieced together
from three fragments of slate brought up from a deep-blasted aperture. These
fragments came from a point to the westward, near the Queen Alexandra Range;
and Lake, as a biologist, seemed to find their curious marking unusually
puzzling and provocative, though to my geological eye it looked not unlike some
of the ripple effects reasonably common in the sedimentary rocks. Since slate
is no more than a metamorphic formation into which a sedimentary stratum is
pressed, and since the pressure itself produces odd distorting effects on any
markings which may exist, I saw no reason for extreme wonder over the striated
depression.
On January 6, 1931, Lake, Pabodie, Danforth, all six of the students, four
mechanics, and I flew directly over the south pole in two of the great planes,
being forced down once by a sudden high wind which fortunately did not develop
into a typical storm. This was, as the papers have stated, one of several
observation flights; during others of which we tried to discern new
topographical features in areas unreached by previous explorers. Our early
flights were disappointing in this latter respect; though they afforded us some
magnificent examples of the richly fantastic and deceptive mirages of the polar
regions, of which our sea voyage had given us some brief foretastes. Distant
mountains floated in the sky as enchanted cities, and often the whole white
world would dissolve into a gold, silver, and scarlet land of Dunsanian dreams
and adventurous expectancy under the magic of the low midnight sun. On cloudy
days we had considerable trouble in flying, owing to the tendency of snowy
earth and sky to merge into one mystical opalescent void with no visible
horizon to mark the junction of the two.
At length we resolved to carry out our original plan of flying 500 miles
eastward with all four exploring planes and establishing a fresh sub-base at a
point which would probably be on the smaller continental division, as we
mistakenly conceived it. Geological specimens obtained there would be desirable
for purposes of comparison. Our health so far had remained excellent;
lime-juice well offsetting the steady diet of tinned and salted food, and
temperatures generally above zero enabling us to do without our thickest furs.
It was now midsummer, and with haste and care we might be able to conclude work
by March and avoid a tedious wintering through the long antarctic night.
Several savage windstorms had burst upon us from the west, but we had escaped
damage through the skill of Atwood in devising rudimentary aëroplane shelters
and windbreaks of heavy snow blocks, and reinforcing the principal camp
buildings with snow. Our good luck and efficiency had indeed been almost
uncanny.
The outside world knew, of course, of our programme, and was told also of
Lake’s strange and dogged insistence on a westward—or rather,
northwestward—prospecting trip before our radical shift to the new base. It
seems he had pondered a great deal, and with alarmingly radical daring, over
that triangular striated marking in the slate; reading into it certain
contradictions in Nature and geological period which whetted his curiosity to
the utmost, and made him avid to sink more borings and blastings in the
west-stretching formation to which the exhumed fragments evidently belonged. He
was strangely convinced that the marking was the print of some bulky, unknown,
and radically unclassifiable organism of considerably advanced evolution,
notwithstanding that the rock which bore it was of so vastly ancient a
date—Cambrian if not actually pre-Cambrian—as to preclude the probable
existence not only of all highly evolved life, but of any life at all above the
unicellular or at most the trilobite stage. These fragments, with their odd
marking, must have been 500 million to a thousand million years old.

II.

Popular imagination, I judge, responded actively to our wireless bulletins of
Lake’s start northwestward into regions never trodden by human foot or
penetrated by human imagination; though we did not mention his wild hopes of
revolutionising the entire sciences of biology and geology. His preliminary
sledging and boring journey of January 11–18 with Pabodie and five
others—marred by the loss of two dogs in an upset when crossing one of the
great pressure-ridges in the ice—had brought up more and more of the Archaean
slate; and even I was interested by the singular profusion of evident fossil
markings in that unbelievably ancient stratum. These markings, however, were of
very primitive life-forms involving no great paradox except that any life-forms
should occur in rock as definitely pre-Cambrian as this seemed to be; hence I
still failed to see the good sense of Lake’s demand for an interlude in our
time-saving programme—an interlude requiring the use of all four planes, many
men, and the whole of the expedition’s mechanical apparatus. I did not, in the
end, veto the plan; though I decided not to accompany the northwestward party
despite Lake’s plea for my geological advice. While they were gone, I would
remain at the base with Pabodie and five men and work out final plans for the
eastward shift. In preparation for this transfer one of the planes had begun to
move up a good gasoline supply from McMurdo Sound; but this could wait
temporarily. I kept with me one sledge and nine dogs, since it is unwise to be
at any time without possible transportation in an utterly tenantless world of
aeon-long death.
Lake’s sub-expedition into the unknown, as everyone will recall, sent out its
own reports from the short-wave transmitters on the planes; these being
simultaneously picked up by our apparatus at the southern base and by the
Arkham at McMurdo Sound, whence they were relayed to the outside world on
wave-lengths up to fifty metres. The start was made January 22 at 4 A.M.; and
the first wireless message we received came only two hours later, when Lake
spoke of descending and starting a small-scale ice-melting and bore at a point
some 300 miles away from us. Six hours after that a second and very excited
message told of the frantic, beaver-like work whereby a shallow shaft had been
sunk and blasted; culminating in the discovery of slate fragments with several
markings approximately like the one which had caused the original puzzlement.
Three hours later a brief bulletin announced the resumption of the flight in
the teeth of a raw and piercing gale; and when I despatched a message of
protest against further hazards, Lake replied curtly that his new specimens
made any hazard worth taking. I saw that his excitement had reached the point
of mutiny, and that I could do nothing to check this headlong risk of the whole
expedition’s success; but it was appalling to think of his plunging deeper and
deeper into that treacherous and sinister white immensity of tempests and
unfathomed mysteries which stretched off for some 1500 miles to the half-known,
half-suspected coast-line of Queen Mary and Knox Lands.
Then, in about an hour and a half more, came that doubly excited message from
Lake’s moving plane which almost reversed my sentiments and made me wish I had
accompanied the party.

    “10:05 P.M. On the wing. After snowstorm, have spied mountain-range ahead
higher than any hitherto seen. May equal Himalayas allowing for height of
plateau. Probable Latitude 76° 15′, Longitude 113° 10′ E. Reaches far as can
see to right and left. Suspicion of two smoking cones. All peaks black and bare
of snow. Gale blowing off them impedes navigation.”

After that Pabodie, the men, and I hung breathlessly over the receiver. Thought
of this titanic mountain rampart 700 miles away inflamed our deepest sense of
adventure; and we rejoiced that our expedition, if not ourselves personally,
had been its discoverers. In half an hour Lake called us again.

    “Moulton’s plane forced down on plateau in foothills, but nobody hurt and
perhaps can repair. Shall transfer essentials to other three for return or
further moves if necessary, but no more heavy plane travel needed just now.
Mountains surpass anything in imagination. Am going up scouting in Carroll’s
plane, with all weight out. You can’t imagine anything like this. Highest peaks
must go over 35,000 feet. Everest out of the running. Atwood to work out height
with theodolite while Carroll and I go up. Probably wrong about cones, for
formations look stratified. Possibly pre-Cambrian slate with other strata mixed
in. Queer skyline effects—regular sections of cubes clinging to highest peaks.
Whole thing marvellous in red-gold light of low sun. Like land of mystery in a
dream or gateway to forbidden world of untrodden wonder. Wish you were here to
study.”

Though it was technically sleeping-time, not one of us listeners thought for a
moment of retiring. It must have been a good deal the same at McMurdo Sound,
where the supply cache and the Arkham were also getting the messages; for Capt.
Douglas gave out a call congratulating everybody on the important find, and
Sherman, the cache operator, seconded his sentiments. We were sorry, of course,
about the damaged aëroplane; but hoped it could be easily mended. Then, at 11
P.M., came another call from Lake.

    “Up with Carroll over highest foothills. Don’t dare try really tall peaks
in present weather, but shall later. Frightful work climbing, and hard going at
this altitude, but worth it. Great range fairly solid, hence can’t get any
glimpses beyond. Main summits exceed Himalayas, and very queer. Range looks
like pre-Cambrian slate, with plain signs of many other upheaved strata. Was
wrong about volcanism. Goes farther in either direction than we can see. Swept
clear of snow above about 21,000 feet. Odd formations on slopes of highest
mountains. Great low square blocks with exactly vertical sides, and rectangular
lines of low vertical ramparts, like the old Asian castles clinging to steep
mountains in Roerich’s paintings. Impressive from distance. Flew close to some,
and Carroll thought they were formed of smaller separate pieces, but that is
probably weathering. Most edges crumbled and rounded off as if exposed to
storms and climate changes for millions of years. Parts, especially upper
parts, seem to be of lighter-coloured rock than any visible strata on slopes
proper, hence an evidently crystalline origin. Close flying shews many
cave-mouths, some unusually regular in outline, square or semicircular. You
must come and investigate. Think I saw rampart squarely on top of one peak.
Height seems about 30,000 to 35,000 feet. Am up 21,500 myself, in devilish
gnawing cold. Wind whistles and pipes through passes and in and out of caves,
but no flying danger so far.”

From then on for another half-hour Lake kept up a running fire of comment, and
expressed his intention of climbing some of the peaks on foot. I replied that I
would join him as soon as he could send a plane, and that Pabodie and I would
work out the best gasoline plan—just where and how to concentrate our supply in
view of the expedition’s altered character. Obviously, Lake’s boring
operations, as well as his aëroplane activities, would need a great deal
delivered for the new base which he was to establish at the foot of the
mountains; and it was possible that the eastward flight might not be made after
all this season. In connexion with this business I called Capt. Douglas and
asked him to get as much as possible out of the ships and up the barrier with
the single dog-team we had left there. A direct route across the unknown region
between Lake and McMurdo Sound was what we really ought to establish.
Lake called me later to say that he had decided to let the camp stay where
Moulton’s plane had been forced down, and where repairs had already progressed
somewhat. The ice-sheet was very thin, with dark ground here and there visible,
and he would sink some borings and blasts at that very point before making any
sledge trips or climbing expeditions. He spoke of the ineffable majesty of the
whole scene, and the queer state of his sensations at being in the lee of vast
silent pinnacles whose ranks shot up like a wall reaching the sky at the
world’s rim. Atwood’s theodolite observations had placed the height of the five
tallest peaks at from 30,000 to 34,000 feet. The windswept nature of the
terrain clearly disturbed Lake, for it argued the occasional existence of
prodigious gales violent beyond anything we had so far encountered. His camp
lay a little more than five miles from where the higher foothills abruptly
rose. I could almost trace a note of subconscious alarm in his words—flashed
across a glacial void of 700 miles—as he urged that we all hasten with the
matter and get the strange new region disposed of as soon as possible. He was
about to rest now, after a continuous day’s work of almost unparalleled speed,
strenuousness, and results.
In the morning I had a three-cornered wireless talk with Lake and Capt. Douglas
at their widely separated bases; and it was agreed that one of Lake’s planes
would come to my base for Pabodie, the five men, and myself, as well as for all
the fuel it could carry. The rest of the fuel question, depending on our
decision about an easterly trip, could wait for a few days; since Lake had
enough for immediate camp heat and borings. Eventually the old southern base
ought to be restocked; but if we postponed the easterly trip we would not use
it till the next summer, and meanwhile Lake must send a plane to explore a
direct route between his new mountains and McMurdo Sound.
Pabodie and I prepared to close our base for a short or long period, as the
case might be. If we wintered in the antarctic we would probably fly straight
from Lake’s base to the Arkham without returning to this spot. Some of our
conical tents had already been reinforced by blocks of hard snow, and now we
decided to complete the job of making a permanent Esquimau village. Owing to a
very liberal tent supply, Lake had with him all that his base would need even
after our arrival. I wirelessed that Pabodie and I would be ready for the
northwestward move after one day’s work and one night’s rest.
Our labours, however, were not very steady after 4 P.M.; for about that time
Lake began sending in the most extraordinary and excited messages. His working
day had started unpropitiously; since an aëroplane survey of the nearly exposed
rock surfaces shewed an entire absence of those Archaean and primordial strata
for which he was looking, and which formed so great a part of the colossal
peaks that loomed up at a tantalising distance from the camp. Most of the rocks
glimpsed were apparently Jurassic and Comanchian sandstones and Permian and
Triassic schists, with now and then a glossy black outcropping suggesting a
hard and slaty coal. This rather discouraged Lake, whose plans all hinged on
unearthing specimens more than 500 million years older. It was clear to him
that in order to recover the Archaean slate vein in which he had found the odd
markings, he would have to make a long sledge trip from these foothills to the
steep slopes of the gigantic mountains themselves.
He had resolved, nevertheless, to do some local boring as part of the
expedition’s general programme; hence set up the drill and put five men to work
with it while the rest finished settling the camp and repairing the damaged
aëroplane. The softest visible rock—a sandstone about a quarter of a mile from
the camp—had been chosen for the first sampling; and the drill made excellent
progress without much supplementary blasting. It was about three hours
afterward, following the first really heavy blast of the operation, that the
shouting of the drill crew was heard; and that young Gedney—the acting
foreman—rushed into the camp with the startling news.
They had struck a cave. Early in the boring the sandstone had given place to a
vein of Comanchian limestone full of minute fossil cephalopods, corals, echini,
and spirifera, and with occasional suggestions of siliceous sponges and marine
vertebrate bones—the latter probably of teliosts, sharks, and ganoids. This in
itself was important enough, as affording the first vertebrate fossils the
expedition had yet secured; but when shortly afterward the drill-head dropped
through the stratum into apparent vacancy, a wholly new and doubly intense wave
of excitement spread among the excavators. A good-sized blast had laid open the
subterrene secret; and now, through a jagged aperture perhaps five feet across
and three feet thick, there yawned before the avid searchers a section of
shallow limestone hollowing worn more than fifty million years ago by the
trickling ground waters of a bygone tropic world.
The hollowed layer was not more than seven or eight feet deep, but extended off
indefinitely in all directions and had a fresh, slightly moving air which
suggested its membership in an extensive subterranean system. Its roof and
floor were abundantly equipped with large stalactites and stalagmites, some of
which met in columnar form; but important above all else was the vast deposit
of shells and bones which in places nearly choked the passage. Washed down from
unknown jungles of Mesozoic tree-ferns and fungi, and forests of Tertiary
cycads, fan-palms, and primitive angiosperms, this osseous medley contained
representatives of more Cretaceous, Eocene, and other animal species than the
greatest palaeontologist could have counted or classified in a year. Molluscs,
crustacean armour, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and early mammals—great
and small, known and unknown. No wonder Gedney ran back to the camp shouting,
and no wonder everyone else dropped work and rushed headlong through the biting
cold to where the tall derrick marked a new-found gateway to secrets of inner
earth and vanished aeons.
When Lake had satisfied the first keen edge of his curiosity he scribbled a
message in his notebook and had young Moulton run back to the camp to despatch
it by wireless. This was my first word of the discovery, and it told of the
identification of early shells, bones of ganoids and placoderms, remnants of
labyrinthodonts and thecodonts, great mososaur skull fragments, dinosaur
vertebrae and armour-plates, pterodactyl teeth and wing-bones, archaeopteryx
debris, Miocene sharks’ teeth, primitive bird-skulls, and skulls, vertebrae,
and other bones of archaic mammals such as palaeotheres, xiphodons,
dinocerases, eohippi, oreodons, and titanotheres. There was nothing as recent
as a mastodon, elephant, true camel, deer, or bovine animal; hence Lake
concluded that the last deposits had occurred during the Oligocene age, and
that the hollowed stratum had lain in its present dried, dead, and inaccessible
state for at least thirty million years.
On the other hand, the prevalence of very early life-forms was singular in the
highest degree. Though the limestone formation was, on the evidence of such
typical imbedded fossils as ventriculites, positively and unmistakably
Comanchian and not a particle earlier; the free fragments in the hollow space
included a surprising proportion from organisms hitherto considered as peculiar
to far older periods—even rudimentary fishes, molluscs, and corals as remote as
the Silurian or Ordovician. The inevitable inference was that in this part of
the world there had been a remarkable and unique degree of continuity between
the life of over 300 million years ago and that of only thirty million years
ago. How far this continuity had extended beyond the Oligocene age when the
cavern was closed, was of course past all speculation. In any event, the coming
of the frightful ice in the Pleistocene some 500,000 years ago—a mere yesterday
as compared with the age of this cavity—must have put an end to any of the
primal forms which had locally managed to outlive their common terms.
Lake was not content to let his first message stand, but had another bulletin
written and despatched across the snow to the camp before Moulton could get
back. After that Moulton stayed at the wireless in one of the planes;
transmitting to me—and to the Arkham for relaying to the outside world—the
frequent postscripts which Lake sent him by a succession of messengers. Those
who followed the newspapers will remember the excitement created among men of
science by that afternoon’s reports—reports which have finally led, after all
these years, to the organisation of that very Starkweather-Moore Expedition
which I am so anxious to dissuade from its purposes. I had better give the
messages literally as Lake sent them, and as our base operator McTighe
translated them from his pencil shorthand.

    “Fowler makes discovery of highest importance in sandstone and limestone
fragments from blasts. Several distinct triangular striated prints like those
in Archaean slate, proving that source survived from over 600 million years ago
to Comanchian times without more than moderate morphological changes and
decrease in average size. Comanchian prints apparently more primitive or
decadent, if anything, than older ones. Emphasise importance of discovery in
press. Will mean to biology what Einstein has meant to mathematics and physics.
Joins up with my previous work and amplifies conclusions. Appears to indicate,
as I suspected, that earth has seen whole cycle or cycles of organic life
before known one that begins with Archaeozoic cells. Was evolved and
specialised not later than thousand million years ago, when planet was young
and recently uninhabitable for any life-forms or normal protoplasmic structure.
Question arises when, where, and how development took place.”
    ————————
    “Later. Examining certain skeletal fragments of large land and marine
saurians and primitive mammals, find singular local wounds or injuries to bony
structure not attributable to any known predatory or carnivorous animal of any
period. Of two sorts—straight, penetrant bores, and apparently hacking
incisions. One or two cases of cleanly severed bone. Not many specimens
affected. Am sending to camp for electric torches. Will extend search area
underground by hacking away stalactites.”
    ————————
    “Still later. Have found peculiar soapstone fragment about six inches
across and an inch and a half thick, wholly unlike any visible local formation.
Greenish, but no evidences to place its period. Has curious smoothness and
regularity. Shaped like five-pointed star with tips broken off, and signs of
other cleavage at inward angles and in centre of surface. Small, smooth
depression in centre of unbroken surface. Arouses much curiosity as to source
and weathering. Probably some freak of water action. Carroll, with magnifier,
thinks he can make out additional markings of geologic significance. Groups of
tiny dots in regular patterns. Dogs growing uneasy as we work, and seem to hate
this soapstone. Must see if it has any peculiar odour. Will report again when
Mills gets back with light and we start on underground area.”
    ————————
    “10:15 P.M. Important discovery. Orrendorf and Watkins, working underground
at 9:45 with light, found monstrous barrel-shaped fossil of wholly unknown
nature; probably vegetable unless overgrown specimen of unknown marine radiata.
Tissue evidently preserved by mineral salts. Tough as leather, but astonishing
flexibility retained in places. Marks of broken-off parts at ends and around
sides. Six feet end to end, 3.5 feet central diameter, tapering to 1 foot at
each end. Like a barrel with five bulging ridges in place of staves. Lateral
breakages, as of thinnish stalks, are at equator in middle of these ridges. In
furrows between ridges are curious growths. Combs or wings that fold up and
spread out like fans. All greatly damaged but one, which gives almost
seven-foot wing spread. Arrangement reminds one of certain monsters of primal
myth, especially fabled Elder Things in Necronomicon. These wings seem to be
membraneous, stretched on framework of glandular tubing. Apparent minute
orifices in frame tubing at wing tips. Ends of body shrivelled, giving no clue
to interior or to what has been broken off there. Must dissect when we get back
to camp. Can’t decide whether vegetable or animal. Many features obviously of
almost incredible primitiveness. Have set all hands cutting stalactites and
looking for further specimens. Additional scarred bones found, but these must
wait. Having trouble with dogs. They can’t endure the new specimen, and would
probably tear it to pieces if we didn’t keep it at a distance from them.”
    ————————
    “11:30 P.M. Attention, Dyer, Pabodie, Douglas. Matter of highest—I might
say transcendent—importance. Arkham must relay to Kingsport Head Station at
once. Strange barrel growth is the Archaean thing that left prints in rocks.
Mills, Boudreau, and Fowler discover cluster of thirteen more at underground
point forty feet from aperture. Mixed with curiously rounded and configured
soapstone fragments smaller than one previously found—star-shaped but no marks
of breakage except at some of the points. Of organic specimens, eight
apparently perfect, with all appendages. Have brought all to surface, leading
off dogs to distance. They cannot stand the things. Give close attention to
description and repeat back for accuracy. Papers must get this right.
    “Objects are eight feet long all over. Six-foot five-ridged barrel torso
3.5 feet central diameter, 1 foot end diameters. Dark grey, flexible, and
infinitely tough. Seven-foot membraneous wings of same colour, found folded,
spread out of furrows between ridges. Wing framework tubular or glandular, of
lighter grey, with orifices at wing tips. Spread wings have serrated edge.
Around equator, one at central apex of each of the five vertical, stave-like
ridges, are five systems of light grey flexible arms or tentacles found tightly
folded to torso but expansible to maximum length of over 3 feet. Like arms of
primitive crinoid. Single stalks 3 inches diameter branch after 6 inches into
five sub-stalks, each of which branches after 8 inches into five small,
tapering tentacles or tendrils, giving each stalk a total of 25 tentacles.
    “At top of torso blunt bulbous neck of lighter grey with gill-like
suggestions holds yellowish five-pointed starfish-shaped apparent head covered
with three-inch wiry cilia of various prismatic colours. Head thick and puffy,
about 2 feet point to point, with three-inch flexible yellowish tubes
projecting from each point. Slit in exact centre of top probably breathing
aperture. At end of each tube is spherical expansion where yellowish membrane
rolls back on handling to reveal glassy, red-irised globe, evidently an eye.
Five slightly longer reddish tubes start from inner angles of starfish-shaped
head and end in sac-like swellings of same colour which upon pressure open to
bell-shaped orifices 2 inches maximum diameter and lined with sharp white
tooth-like projections. Probable mouths. All these tubes, cilia, and points of
starfish-head found folded tightly down; tubes and points clinging to bulbous
neck and torso. Flexibility surprising despite vast toughness.
    “At bottom of torso rough but dissimilarly functioning counterparts of head
arrangements exist. Bulbous light-grey pseudo-neck, without gill suggestions,
holds greenish five-pointed starfish-arrangement. Tough, muscular arms 4 feet
long and tapering from 7 inches diameter at base to about 2.5 at point. To each
point is attached small end of a greenish five-veined membraneous triangle 8
inches long and 6 wide at farther end. This is the paddle, fin, or pseudo-foot
which has made prints in rocks from a thousand million to fifty or sixty
million years old. From inner angles of starfish-arrangement project two-foot
reddish tubes tapering from 3 inches diameter at base to 1 at tip. Orifices at
tips. All these parts infinitely tough and leathery, but extremely flexible.
Four-foot arms with paddles undoubtedly used for locomotion of some sort,
marine or otherwise. When moved, display suggestions of exaggerated
muscularity. As found, all these projections tightly folded over pseudo-neck
and end of torso, corresponding to projections at other end.
    “Cannot yet assign positively to animal or vegetable kingdom, but odds now
favour animal. Probably represents incredibly advanced evolution of radiata
without loss of certain primitive features. Echinoderm resemblances
unmistakable despite local contradictory evidences. Wing structure puzzles in
view of probable marine habitat, but may have use in water navigation. Symmetry
is curiously vegetable-like, suggesting vegetable’s essentially up-and-down
structure rather than animal’s fore-and-aft structure. Fabulously early date of
evolution, preceding even simplest Archaean protozoa hitherto known, baffles
all conjecture as to origin.
    “Complete specimens have such uncanny resemblance to certain creatures of
primal myth that suggestion of ancient existence outside antarctic becomes
inevitable. Dyer and Pabodie have read Necronomicon and seen Clark Ashton
Smith’s nightmare paintings based on text, and will understand when I speak of
Elder Things supposed to have created all earth-life as jest or mistake.
Students have always thought conception formed from morbid imaginative
treatment of very ancient tropical radiata. Also like prehistoric folklore
things Wilmarth has spoken of—Cthulhu cult appendages, etc.
    “Vast field of study opened. Deposits probably of late Cretaceous or early
Eocene period, judging from associated specimens. Massive stalagmites deposited
above them. Hard work hewing out, but toughness prevented damage. State of
preservation miraculous, evidently owing to limestone action. No more found so
far, but will resume search later. Job now to get fourteen huge specimens to
camp without dogs, which bark furiously and can’t be trusted near them. With
nine men—three left to guard the dogs—we ought to manage the three sledges
fairly well, though wind is bad. Must establish plane communication with
McMurdo Sound and begin shipping material. But I’ve got to dissect one of these
things before we take any rest. Wish I had a real laboratory here. Dyer better
kick himself for having tried to stop my westward trip. First the world’s
greatest mountains, and then this. If this last isn’t the high spot of the
expedition, I don’t know what is. We’re made scientifically. Congrats, Pabodie,
on the drill that opened up the cave. Now will Arkham please repeat
description?”

The sensations of Pabodie and myself at receipt of this report were almost
beyond description, nor were our companions much behind us in enthusiasm.
McTighe, who had hastily translated a few high spots as they came from the
droning receiving set, wrote out the entire message from his shorthand version
as soon as Lake’s operator signed off. All appreciated the epoch-making
significance of the discovery, and I sent Lake congratulations as soon as the
Arkham’s operator had repeated back the descriptive parts as requested; and my
example was followed by Sherman from his station at the McMurdo Sound supply
cache, as well as by Capt. Douglas of the Arkham. Later, as head of the
expedition, I added some remarks to be relayed through the Arkham to the
outside world. Of course, rest was an absurd thought amidst this excitement;
and my only wish was to get to Lake’s camp as quickly as I could. It
disappointed me when he sent word that a rising mountain gale made early aërial
travel impossible.
But within an hour and a half interest again rose to banish disappointment.
Lake was sending more messages, and told of the completely successful
transportation of the fourteen great specimens to the camp. It had been a hard
pull, for the things were surprisingly heavy; but nine men had accomplished it
very neatly. Now some of the party were hurriedly building a snow corral at a
safe distance from the camp, to which the dogs could be brought for greater
convenience in feeding. The specimens were laid out on the hard snow near the
camp, save for one on which Lake was making crude attempts at dissection.
This dissection seemed to be a greater task than had been expected; for despite
the heat of a gasoline stove in the newly raised laboratory tent, the
deceptively flexible tissues of the chosen specimen—a powerful and intact
one—lost nothing of their more than leathery toughness. Lake was puzzled as to
how he might make the requisite incisions without violence destructive enough
to upset all the structural niceties he was looking for. He had, it is true,
seven more perfect specimens; but these were too few to use up recklessly
unless the cave might later yield an unlimited supply. Accordingly he removed
the specimen and dragged in one which, though having remnants of the
starfish-arrangements at both ends, was badly crushed and partly disrupted
along one of the great torso furrows.
Results, quickly reported over the wireless, were baffling and provocative
indeed. Nothing like delicacy or accuracy was possible with instruments hardly
able to cut the anomalous tissue, but the little that was achieved left us all
awed and bewildered. Existing biology would have to be wholly revised, for this
thing was no product of any cell-growth science knows about. There had been
scarcely any mineral replacement, and despite an age of perhaps forty million
years the internal organs were wholly intact. The leathery, undeteriorative,
and almost indestructible quality was an inherent attribute of the thing’s form
of organisation; and pertained to some palaeogean cycle of invertebrate
evolution utterly beyond our powers of speculation. At first all that Lake
found was dry, but as the heated tent produced its thawing effect, organic
moisture of pungent and offensive odour was encountered toward the thing’s
uninjured side. It was not blood, but a thick, dark-green fluid apparently
answering the same purpose. By the time Lake reached this stage all 37 dogs had
been brought to the still uncompleted corral near the camp; and even at that
distance set up a savage barking and show of restlessness at the acrid,
diffusive smell.
Far from helping to place the strange entity, this provisional dissection
merely deepened its mystery. All guesses about its external members had been
correct, and on the evidence of these one could hardly hesitate to call the
thing animal; but internal inspection brought up so many vegetable evidences
that Lake was left hopelessly at sea. It had digestion and circulation, and
eliminated waste matter through the reddish tubes of its starfish-shaped base.
Cursorily, one would say that its respiratory apparatus handled oxygen rather
than carbon dioxide; and there were odd evidences of air-storage chambers and
methods of shifting respiration from the external orifice to at least two other
fully developed breathing-systems—gills and pores. Clearly, it was amphibian
and probably adapted to long airless hibernation-periods as well. Vocal organs
seemed present in connexion with the main respiratory system, but they
presented anomalies beyond immediate solution. Articulate speech, in the sense
of syllable-utterance, seemed barely conceivable; but musical piping notes
covering a wide range were highly probable. The muscular system was almost
preternaturally developed.
The nervous system was so complex and highly developed as to leave Lake aghast.
Though excessively primitive and archaic in some respects, the thing had a set
of ganglial centres and connectives arguing the very extremes of specialised
development. Its five-lobed brain was surprisingly advanced; and there were
signs of a sensory equipment, served in part through the wiry cilia of the
head, involving factors alien to any other terrestrial organism. Probably it
had more than five senses, so that its habits could not be predicted from any
existing analogy. It must, Lake thought, have been a creature of keen
sensitiveness and delicately differentiated functions in its primal world; much
like the ants and bees of today. It reproduced like the vegetable cryptogams,
especially the pteridophytes; having spore-cases at the tips of the wings and
evidently developing from a thallus or prothallus.
But to give it a name at this stage was mere folly. It looked like a radiate,
but was clearly something more. It was partly vegetable, but had three-fourths
of the essentials of animal structure. That it was marine in origin, its
symmetrical contour and certain other attributes clearly indicated; yet one
could not be exact as to the limit of its later adaptations. The wings, after
all, held a persistent suggestion of the aërial. How it could have undergone
its tremendously complex evolution on a new-born earth in time to leave prints
in Archaean rocks was so far beyond conception as to make Lake whimsically
recall the primal myths about Great Old Ones who filtered down from the stars
and concocted earth-life as a joke or mistake; and the wild tales of cosmic
hill things from Outside told by a folklorist colleague in Miskatonic’s English
department.
Naturally, he considered the possibility of the pre-Cambrian prints’ having
been made by a less evolved ancestor of the present specimens; but quickly
rejected this too facile theory upon considering the advanced structural
qualities of the older fossils. If anything, the later contours shewed
decadence rather than higher evolution. The size of the pseudo-feet had
decreased, and the whole morphology seemed coarsened and simplified. Moreover,
the nerves and organs just examined held singular suggestions of retrogression
from forms still more complex. Atrophied and vestigial parts were surprisingly
prevalent. Altogether, little could be said to have been solved; and Lake fell
back on mythology for a provisional name—jocosely dubbing his finds “The Elder
Ones”.
At about 2:30 A.M., having decided to postpone further work and get a little
rest, he covered the dissected organism with a tarpaulin, emerged from the
laboratory tent, and studied the intact specimens with renewed interest. The
ceaseless antarctic sun had begun to limber up their tissues a trifle, so that
the head-points and tubes of two or three shewed signs of unfolding; but Lake
did not believe there was any danger of immediate decomposition in the almost
sub-zero air. He did, however, move all the undissected specimens closer
together and throw a spare tent over them in order to keep off the direct solar
rays. That would also help to keep their possible scent away from the dogs,
whose hostile unrest was really becoming a problem even at their substantial
distance and behind the higher and higher snow walls which an increased quota
of the men were hastening to raise around their quarters. He had to weight down
the corners of the tent-cloth with heavy blocks of snow to hold it in place
amidst the rising gale, for the titan mountains seemed about to deliver some
gravely severe blasts. Early apprehensions about sudden antarctic winds were
revived, and under Atwood’s supervision precautions were taken to bank the
tents, new dog-corral, and crude aëroplane shelters with snow on the
mountainward side. These latter shelters, begun with hard snow blocks during
odd moments, were by no means as high as they should have been; and Lake
finally detached all hands from other tasks to work on them.
It was after four when Lake at last prepared to sign off and advised us all to
share the rest period his outfit would take when the shelter walls were a
little higher. He held some friendly chat with Pabodie over the ether, and
repeated his praise of the really marvellous drills that had helped him make
his discovery. Atwood also sent greetings and praises. I gave Lake a warm word
of congratulation, owning up that he was right about the western trip; and we
all agreed to get in touch by wireless at ten in the morning. If the gale was
then over, Lake would send a plane for the party at my base. Just before
retiring I despatched a final message to the Arkham with instructions about
toning down the day’s news for the outside world, since the full details seemed
radical enough to rouse a wave of incredulity until further substantiated.

III.

None of us, I imagine, slept very heavily or continuously that morning; for
both the excitement of Lake’s discovery and the mounting fury of the wind were
against such a thing. So savage was the blast, even where we were, that we
could not help wondering how much worse it was at Lake’s camp, directly under
the vast unknown peaks that bred and delivered it. McTighe was awake at ten
o’clock and tried to get Lake on the wireless, as agreed, but some electrical
condition in the disturbed air to the westward seemed to prevent communication.
We did, however, get the Arkham, and Douglas told me that he had likewise been
vainly trying to reach Lake. He had not known about the wind, for very little
was blowing at McMurdo Sound despite its persistent rage where we were.
Throughout the day we all listened anxiously and tried to get Lake at
intervals, but invariably without results. About noon a positive frenzy of wind
stampeded out of the west, causing us to fear for the safety of our camp; but
it eventually died down, with only a moderate relapse at 2 P.M. After three
o’clock it was very quiet, and we redoubled our efforts to get Lake. Reflecting
that he had four planes, each provided with an excellent short-wave outfit, we
could not imagine any ordinary accident capable of crippling all his wireless
equipment at once. Nevertheless the stony silence continued; and when we
thought of the delirious force the wind must have had in his locality we could
not help making the most direful conjectures.
By six o’clock our fears had become intense and definite, and after a wireless
consultation with Douglas and Thorfinnssen I resolved to take steps toward
investigation. The fifth aëroplane, which we had left at the McMurdo Sound
supply cache with Sherman and two sailors, was in good shape and ready for
instant use; and it seemed that the very emergency for which it had been saved
was now upon us. I got Sherman by wireless and ordered him to join me with the
plane and the two sailors at the southern base as quickly as possible; the air
conditions being apparently highly favourable. We then talked over the
personnel of the coming investigation party; and decided that we would include
all hands, together with the sledge and dogs which I had kept with me. Even so
great a load would not be too much for one of the huge planes built to our
especial orders for heavy machinery transportation. At intervals I still tried
to reach Lake with the wireless, but all to no purpose.
Sherman, with the sailors Gunnarsson and Larsen, took off at 7:30; and reported
a quiet flight from several points on the wing. They arrived at our base at
midnight, and all hands at once discussed the next move. It was risky business
sailing over the antarctic in a single aëroplane without any line of bases, but
no one drew back from what seemed like the plainest necessity. We turned in at
two o’clock for a brief rest after some preliminary loading of the plane, but
were up again in four hours to finish the loading and packing.
At 7:15 A.M., January 25th, we started flying northwestward under McTighe’s
pilotage with ten men, seven dogs, a sledge, a fuel and food supply, and other
items including the plane’s wireless outfit. The atmosphere was clear, fairly
quiet, and relatively mild in temperature; and we anticipated very little
trouble in reaching the latitude and longitude designated by Lake as the site
of his camp. Our apprehensions were over what we might find, or fail to find,
at the end of our journey; for silence continued to answer all calls despatched
to the camp.
Every incident of that four-and-a-half-hour flight is burned into my
recollection because of its crucial position in my life. It marked my loss, at
the age of fifty-four, of all that peace and balance which the normal mind
possesses through its accustomed conception of external Nature and Nature’s
laws. Thenceforward the ten of us—but the student Danforth and myself above all
others—were to face a hideously amplified world of lurking horrors which
nothing can erase from our emotions, and which we would refrain from sharing
with mankind in general if we could. The newspapers have printed the bulletins
we sent from the moving plane; telling of our non-stop course, our two battles
with treacherous upper-air gales, our glimpse of the broken surface where Lake
had sunk his mid-journey shaft three days before, and our sight of a group of
those strange fluffy snow-cylinders noted by Amundsen and Byrd as rolling in
the wind across the endless leagues of frozen plateau. There came a point,
though, when our sensations could not be conveyed in any words the press would
understand; and a later point when we had to adopt an actual rule of strict
censorship.
The sailor Larsen was first to spy the jagged line of witch-like cones and
pinnacles ahead, and his shouts sent everyone to the windows of the great
cabined plane. Despite our speed, they were very slow in gaining prominence;
hence we knew that they must be infinitely far off, and visible only because of
their abnormal height. Little by little, however, they rose grimly into the
western sky; allowing us to distinguish various bare, bleak, blackish summits,
and to catch the curious sense of phantasy which they inspired as seen in the
reddish antarctic light against the provocative background of iridescent
ice-dust clouds. In the whole spectacle there was a persistent, pervasive hint
of stupendous secrecy and potential revelation; as if these stark, nightmare
spires marked the pylons of a frightful gateway into forbidden spheres of
dream, and complex gulfs of remote time, space, and ultra-dimensionality. I
could not help feeling that they were evil things—mountains of madness whose
farther slopes looked out over some accursed ultimate abyss. That seething,
half-luminous cloud-background held ineffable suggestions of a vague, ethereal
beyondness far more than terrestrially spatial; and gave appalling reminders of
the utter remoteness, separateness, desolation, and aeon-long death of this
untrodden and unfathomed austral world.
It was young Danforth who drew our notice to the curious regularities of the
higher mountain skyline—regularities like clinging fragments of perfect cubes,
which Lake had mentioned in his messages, and which indeed justified his
comparison with the dream-like suggestions of primordial temple-ruins on cloudy
Asian mountain-tops so subtly and strangely painted by Roerich. There was
indeed something hauntingly Roerich-like about this whole unearthly continent
of mountainous mystery. I had felt it in October when we first caught sight of
Victoria Land, and I felt it afresh now. I felt, too, another wave of uneasy
consciousness of Archaean mythical resemblances; of how disturbingly this
lethal realm corresponded to the evilly famed plateau of Leng in the primal
writings. Mythologists have placed Leng in Central Asia; but the racial memory
of man—or of his predecessors—is long, and it may well be that certain tales
have come down from lands and mountains and temples of horror earlier than Asia
and earlier than any human world we know. A few daring mystics have hinted at a
pre-Pleistocene origin for the fragmentary Pnakotic Manuscripts, and have
suggested that the devotees of Tsathoggua were as alien to mankind as
Tsathoggua itself. Leng, wherever in space or time it might brood, was not a
region I would care to be in or near; nor did I relish the proximity of a world
that had ever bred such ambiguous and Archaean monstrosities as those Lake had
just mentioned. At the moment I felt sorry that I had ever read the abhorred
Necronomicon, or talked so much with that unpleasantly erudite folklorist
Wilmarth at the university.
This mood undoubtedly served to aggravate my reaction to the bizarre mirage
which burst upon us from the increasingly opalescent zenith as we drew near the
mountains and began to make out the cumulative undulations of the foothills. I
had seen dozens of polar mirages during the preceding weeks, some of them quite
as uncanny and fantastically vivid as the present sample; but this one had a
wholly novel and obscure quality of menacing symbolism, and I shuddered as the
seething labyrinth of fabulous walls and towers and minarets loomed out of the
troubled ice-vapours above our heads.
The effect was that of a Cyclopean city of no architecture known to man or to
human imagination, with vast aggregations of night-black masonry embodying
monstrous perversions of geometrical laws and attaining the most grotesque
extremes of sinister bizarrerie. There were truncated cones, sometimes terraced
or fluted, surmounted by tall cylindrical shafts here and there bulbously
enlarged and often capped with tiers of thinnish scalloped discs; and strange,
beetling, table-like constructions suggesting piles of multitudinous
rectangular slabs or circular plates or five-pointed stars with each one
overlapping the one beneath. There were composite cones and pyramids either
alone or surmounting cylinders or cubes or flatter truncated cones and
pyramids, and occasional needle-like spires in curious clusters of five. All of
these febrile structures seemed knit together by tubular bridges crossing from
one to the other at various dizzy heights, and the implied scale of the whole
was terrifying and oppressive in its sheer giganticism. The general type of
mirage was not unlike some of the wilder forms observed and drawn by the Arctic
whaler Scoresby in 1820; but at this time and place, with those dark, unknown
mountain peaks soaring stupendously ahead, that anomalous elder-world discovery
in our minds, and the pall of probable disaster enveloping the greater part of
our expedition, we all seemed to find in it a taint of latent malignity and
infinitely evil portent.
I was glad when the mirage began to break up, though in the process the various
nightmare turrets and cones assumed distorted temporary forms of even vaster
hideousness. As the whole illusion dissolved to churning opalescence we began
to look earthward again, and saw that our journey’s end was not far off. The
unknown mountains ahead rose dizzyingly up like a fearsome rampart of giants,
their curious regularities shewing with startling clearness even without a
field-glass. We were over the lowest foothills now, and could see amidst the
snow, ice, and bare patches of their main plateau a couple of darkish spots
which we took to be Lake’s camp and boring. The higher foothills shot up
between five and six miles away, forming a range almost distinct from the
terrifying line of more than Himalayan peaks beyond them. At length Ropes—the
student who had relieved McTighe at the controls—began to head downward toward
the left-hand dark spot whose size marked it as the camp. As he did so, McTighe
sent out the last uncensored wireless message the world was to receive from our
expedition.
Everyone, of course, has read the brief and unsatisfying bulletins of the rest
of our antarctic sojourn. Some hours after our landing we sent a guarded report
of the tragedy we found, and reluctantly announced the wiping out of the whole
Lake party by the frightful wind of the preceding day, or of the night before
that. Eleven known dead, young Gedney missing. People pardoned our hazy lack of
details through realisation of the shock the sad event must have caused us, and
believed us when we explained that the mangling action of the wind had rendered
all eleven bodies unsuitable for transportation outside. Indeed, I flatter
myself that even in the midst of our distress, utter bewilderment, and
soul-clutching horror, we scarcely went beyond the truth in any specific
instance. The tremendous significance lies in what we dared not tell—what I
would not tell now but for the need of warning others off from nameless
terrors.
It is a fact that the wind had wrought dreadful havoc. Whether all could have
lived through it, even without the other thing, is gravely open to doubt. The
storm, with its fury of madly driven ice-particles, must have been beyond
anything our expedition had encountered before. One aëroplane shelter—all, it
seems, had been left in a far too flimsy and inadequate state—was nearly
pulverised; and the derrick at the distant boring was entirely shaken to
pieces. The exposed metal of the grounded planes and drilling machinery was
bruised into a high polish, and two of the small tents were flattened despite
their snow banking. Wooden surfaces left out in the blast were pitted and
denuded of paint, and all signs of tracks in the snow were completely
obliterated. It is also true that we found none of the Archaean biological
objects in a condition to take outside as a whole. We did gather some minerals
from a vast tumbled pile, including several of the greenish soapstone fragments
whose odd five-pointed rounding and faint patterns of grouped dots caused so
many doubtful comparisons; and some fossil bones, among which were the most
typical of the curiously injured specimens.
None of the dogs survived, their hurriedly built snow enclosure near the camp
being almost wholly destroyed. The wind may have done that, though the greater
breakage on the side next the camp, which was not the windward one, suggests an
outward leap or break of the frantic beasts themselves. All three sledges were
gone, and we have tried to explain that the wind may have blown them off into
the unknown. The drill and ice-melting machinery at the boring were too badly
damaged to warrant salvage, so we used them to choke up that subtly disturbing
gateway to the past which Lake had blasted. We likewise left at the camp the
two most shaken-up of the planes; since our surviving party had only four real
pilots—Sherman, Danforth, McTighe, and Ropes—in all, with Danforth in a poor
nervous shape to navigate. We brought back all the books, scientific equipment,
and other incidentals we could find, though much was rather unaccountably blown
away. Spare tents and furs were either missing or badly out of condition.
It was approximately 4 P.M., after wide plane cruising had forced us to give
Gedney up for lost, that we sent our guarded message to the Arkham for
relaying; and I think we did well to keep it as calm and non-committal as we
succeeded in doing. The most we said about agitation concerned our dogs, whose
frantic uneasiness near the biological specimens was to be expected from poor
Lake’s accounts. We did not mention, I think, their display of the same
uneasiness when sniffing around the queer greenish soapstones and certain other
objects in the disordered region; objects including scientific instruments,
aëroplanes, and machinery both at the camp and at the boring, whose parts had
been loosened, moved, or otherwise tampered with by winds that must have
harboured singular curiosity and investigativeness.
About the fourteen biological specimens we were pardonably indefinite. We said
that the only ones we discovered were damaged, but that enough was left of them
to prove Lake’s description wholly and impressively accurate. It was hard work
keeping our personal emotions out of this matter—and we did not mention numbers
or say exactly how we had found those which we did find. We had by that time
agreed not to transmit anything suggesting madness on the part of Lake’s men,
and it surely looked like madness to find six imperfect monstrosities carefully
buried upright in nine-foot snow graves under five-pointed mounds punched over
with groups of dots in patterns exactly like those on the queer greenish
soapstones dug up from Mesozoic or Tertiary times. The eight perfect specimens
mentioned by Lake seemed to have been completely blown away.
We were careful, too, about the public’s general peace of mind; hence Danforth
and I said little about that frightful trip over the mountains the next day. It
was the fact that only a radically lightened plane could possibly cross a range
of such height which mercifully limited that scouting tour to the two of us. On
our return at 1 A.M. Danforth was close to hysterics, but kept an admirably
stiff upper lip. It took no persuasion to make him promise not to shew our
sketches and the other things we brought away in our pockets, not to say
anything more to the others than what we had agreed to relay outside, and to
hide our camera films for private development later on; so that part of my
present story will be as new to Pabodie, McTighe, Ropes, Sherman, and the rest
as it will be to the world in general. Indeed—Danforth is closer mouthed than
I; for he saw—or thinks he saw—one thing he will not tell even me.
As all know, our report included a tale of a hard ascent; a confirmation of
Lake’s opinion that the great peaks are of Archaean slate and other very primal
crumpled strata unchanged since at least middle Comanchian times; a
conventional comment on the regularity of the clinging cube and rampart
formations; a decision that the cave-mouths indicate dissolved calcareous
veins; a conjecture that certain slopes and passes would permit of the scaling
and crossing of the entire range by seasoned mountaineers; and a remark that
the mysterious other side holds a lofty and immense super-plateau as ancient
and unchanging as the mountains themselves—20,000 feet in elevation, with
grotesque rock formations protruding through a thin glacial layer and with low
gradual foothills between the general plateau surface and the sheer precipices
of the highest peaks.
This body of data is in every respect true so far as it goes, and it completely
satisfied the men at the camp. We laid our absence of sixteen hours—a longer
time than our announced flying, landing, reconnoitring, and rock-collecting
programme called for—to a long mythical spell of adverse wind conditions; and
told truly of our landing on the farther foothills. Fortunately our tale
sounded realistic and prosaic enough not to tempt any of the others into
emulating our flight. Had any tried to do that, I would have used every ounce
of my persuasion to stop them—and I do not know what Danforth would have done.
While we were gone, Pabodie, Sherman, Ropes, McTighe, and Williamson had worked
like beavers over Lake’s two best planes; fitting them again for use despite
the altogether unaccountable juggling of their operative mechanism.
We decided to load all the planes the next morning and start back for our old
base as soon as possible. Even though indirect, that was the safest way to work
toward McMurdo Sound; for a straight-line flight across the most utterly
unknown stretches of the aeon-dead continent would involve many additional
hazards. Further exploration was hardly feasible in view of our tragic
decimation and the ruin of our drilling machinery; and the doubts and horrors
around us—which we did not reveal—made us wish only to escape from this austral
world of desolation and brooding madness as swiftly as we could.
As the public knows, our return to the world was accomplished without further
disasters. All planes reached the old base on the evening of the next
day—January 27th—after a swift non-stop flight; and on the 28th we made McMurdo
Sound in two laps, the one pause being very brief, and occasioned by a faulty
rudder in the furious wind over the ice-shelf after we had cleared the great
plateau. In five days more the Arkham and Miskatonic, with all hands and
equipment on board, were shaking clear of the thickening field ice and working
up Ross Sea with the mocking mountains of Victoria Land looming westward
against a troubled antarctic sky and twisting the wind’s wails into a
wide-ranged musical piping which chilled my soul to the quick. Less than a
fortnight later we left the last hint of polar land behind us, and thanked
heaven that we were clear of a haunted, accursed realm where life and death,
space and time, have made black and blasphemous alliances in the unknown epochs
since matter first writhed and swam on the planet’s scarce-cooled crust.
Since our return we have all constantly worked to discourage antarctic
exploration, and have kept certain doubts and guesses to ourselves with
splendid unity and faithfulness. Even young Danforth, with his nervous
breakdown, has not flinched or babbled to his doctors—indeed, as I have said,
there is one thing he thinks he alone saw which he will not tell even me,
though I think it would help his psychological state if he would consent to do
so. It might explain and relieve much, though perhaps the thing was no more
than the delusive aftermath of an earlier shock. That is the impression I
gather after those rare irresponsible moments when he whispers disjointed
things to me—things which he repudiates vehemently as soon as he gets a grip on
himself again.
It will be hard work deterring others from the great white south, and some of
our efforts may directly harm our cause by drawing inquiring notice. We might
have known from the first that human curiosity is undying, and that the results
we announced would be enough to spur others ahead on the same age-long pursuit
of the unknown. Lake’s reports of those biological monstrosities had aroused
naturalists and palaeontologists to the highest pitch; though we were sensible
enough not to shew the detached parts we had taken from the actual buried
specimens, or our photographs of those specimens as they were found. We also
refrained from shewing the more puzzling of the scarred bones and greenish
soapstones; while Danforth and I have closely guarded the pictures we took or
drew on the super-plateau across the range, and the crumpled things we
smoothed, studied in terror, and brought away in our pockets. But now that
Starkweather-Moore party is organising, and with a thoroughness far beyond
anything our outfit attempted. If not dissuaded, they will get to the innermost
nucleus of the antarctic and melt and bore till they bring up that which may
end the world we know. So I must break through all reticences at last—even
about that ultimate nameless thing beyond the mountains of madness.

IV.

It is only with vast hesitancy and repugnance that I let my mind go back to
Lake’s camp and what we really found there—and to that other thing beyond the
frightful mountain wall. I am constantly tempted to shirk the details, and to
let hints stand for actual facts and ineluctable deductions. I hope I have said
enough already to let me glide briefly over the rest; the rest, that is, of the
horror at the camp. I have told of the wind-ravaged terrain, the damaged
shelters, the disarranged machinery, the varied uneasinesses of our dogs, the
missing sledges and other items, the deaths of men and dogs, the absence of
Gedney, and the six insanely buried biological specimens, strangely sound in
texture for all their structural injuries, from a world forty million years
dead. I do not recall whether I mentioned that upon checking up the canine
bodies we found one dog missing. We did not think much about that till
later—indeed, only Danforth and I have thought of it at all.
The principal things I have been keeping back relate to the bodies, and to
certain subtle points which may or may not lend a hideous and incredible kind
of rationale to the apparent chaos. At the time I tried to keep the men’s minds
off those points; for it was so much simpler—so much more normal—to lay
everything to an outbreak of madness on the part of some of Lake’s party. From
the look of things, that daemon mountain wind must have been enough to drive
any man mad in the midst of this centre of all earthly mystery and desolation.
The crowning abnormality, of course, was the condition of the bodies—men and
dogs alike. They had all been in some terrible kind of conflict, and were torn
and mangled in fiendish and altogether inexplicable ways. Death, so far as we
could judge, had in each case come from strangulation or laceration. The dogs
had evidently started the trouble, for the state of their ill-built corral bore
witness to its forcible breakage from within. It had been set some distance
from the camp because of the hatred of the animals for those hellish Archaean
organisms, but the precaution seemed to have been taken in vain. When left
alone in that monstrous wind behind flimsy walls of insufficient height they
must have stampeded—whether from the wind itself, or from some subtle,
increasing odour emitted by the nightmare specimens, one could not say. Those
specimens, of course, had been covered with a tent-cloth; yet the low antarctic
sun had beat steadily upon that cloth, and Lake had mentioned that solar heat
tended to make the strangely sound and tough tissues of the things relax and
expand. Perhaps the wind had whipped the cloth from over them, and jostled them
about in such a way that their more pungent olfactory qualities became manifest
despite their unbelievable antiquity.
But whatever had happened, it was hideous and revolting enough. Perhaps I had
better put squeamishness aside and tell the worst at last—though with a
categorical statement of opinion, based on the first-hand observations and most
rigid deductions of both Danforth and myself, that the then missing Gedney was
in no way responsible for the loathsome horrors we found. I have said that the
bodies were frightfully mangled. Now I must add that some were incised and
subtracted from in the most curious, cold-blooded, and inhuman fashion. It was
the same with dogs and men. All the healthier, fatter bodies, quadrupedal or
bipedal, had had their most solid masses of tissue cut out and removed, as by a
careful butcher; and around them was a strange sprinkling of salt—taken from
the ravaged provision-chests on the planes—which conjured up the most horrible
associations. The thing had occurred in one of the crude aëroplane shelters
from which the plane had been dragged out, and subsequent winds had effaced all
tracks which could have supplied any plausible theory. Scattered bits of
clothing, roughly slashed from the human incision-subjects, hinted no clues. It
is useless to bring up the half-impression of certain faint snow-prints in one
shielded corner of the ruined enclosure—because that impression did not concern
human prints at all, but was clearly mixed up with all the talk of fossil
prints which poor Lake had been giving throughout the preceding weeks. One had
to be careful of one’s imagination in the lee of those overshadowing mountains
of madness.
As I have indicated, Gedney and one dog turned out to be missing in the end.
When we came on that terrible shelter we had missed two dogs and two men; but
the fairly unharmed dissecting tent, which we entered after investigating the
monstrous graves, had something to reveal. It was not as Lake had left it, for
the covered parts of the primal monstrosity had been removed from the
improvised table. Indeed, we had already realised that one of the six imperfect
and insanely buried things we had found—the one with the trace of a peculiarly
hateful odour—must represent the collected sections of the entity which Lake
had tried to analyse. On and around that laboratory table were strown other
things, and it did not take long for us to guess that those things were the
carefully though oddly and inexpertly dissected parts of one man and one dog. I
shall spare the feelings of survivors by omitting mention of the man’s
identity. Lake’s anatomical instruments were missing, but there were evidences
of their careful cleansing. The gasoline stove was also gone, though around it
we found a curious litter of matches. We buried the human parts beside the
other ten men, and the canine parts with the other 35 dogs. Concerning the
bizarre smudges on the laboratory table, and on the jumble of roughly handled
illustrated books scattered near it, we were much too bewildered to speculate.
This formed the worst of the camp horror, but other things were equally
perplexing. The disappearance of Gedney, the one dog, the eight uninjured
biological specimens, the three sledges, and certain instruments, illustrated
technical and scientific books, writing materials, electric torches and
batteries, food and fuel, heating apparatus, spare tents, fur suits, and the
like, was utterly beyond sane conjecture; as were likewise the spatter-fringed
ink-blots on certain pieces of paper, and the evidences of curious alien
fumbling and experimentation around the planes and all other mechanical devices
both at the camp and at the boring. The dogs seemed to abhor this oddly
disordered machinery. Then, too, there was the upsetting of the larder, the
disappearance of certain staples, and the jarringly comical heap of tin cans
pried open in the most unlikely ways and at the most unlikely places. The
profusion of scattered matches, intact, broken, or spent, formed another minor
enigma; as did the two or three tent-cloths and fur suits which we found lying
about with peculiar and unorthodox slashings conceivably due to clumsy efforts
at unimaginable adaptations. The maltreatment of the human and canine bodies,
and the crazy burial of the damaged Archaean specimens, were all of a piece
with this apparent disintegrative madness. In view of just such an eventuality
as the present one, we carefully photographed all the main evidences of insane
disorder at the camp; and shall use the prints to buttress our pleas against
the departure of the proposed Starkweather-Moore Expedition.
Our first act after finding the bodies in the shelter was to photograph and
open the row of insane graves with the five-pointed snow mounds. We could not
help noticing the resemblance of these monstrous mounds, with their clusters of
grouped dots, to poor Lake’s descriptions of the strange greenish soapstones;
and when we came on some of the soapstones themselves in the great mineral pile
we found the likeness very close indeed. The whole general formation, it must
be made clear, seemed abominably suggestive of the starfish-head of the
Archaean entities; and we agreed that the suggestion must have worked potently
upon the sensitised minds of Lake’s overwrought party. Our own first sight of
the actual buried entities formed a horrible moment, and sent the imaginations
of Pabodie and myself back to some of the shocking primal myths we had read and
heard. We all agreed that the mere sight and continued presence of the things
must have coöperated with the oppressive polar solitude and daemon mountain
wind in driving Lake’s party mad.
For madness—centring in Gedney as the only possible surviving agent—was the
explanation spontaneously adopted by everybody so far as spoken utterance was
concerned; though I will not be so naive as to deny that each of us may have
harboured wild guesses which sanity forbade him to formulate completely.
Sherman, Pabodie, and McTighe made an exhaustive aëroplane cruise over all the
surrounding territory in the afternoon, sweeping the horizon with field-glasses
in quest of Gedney and of the various missing things; but nothing came to
light. The party reported that the titan barrier range extended endlessly to
right and left alike, without any diminution in height or essential structure.
On some of the peaks, though, the regular cube and rampart formations were
bolder and plainer; having doubly fantastic similitudes to Roerich-painted
Asian hill ruins. The distribution of cryptical cave-mouths on the black
snow-denuded summits seemed roughly even as far as the range could be traced.
In spite of all the prevailing horrors we were left with enough sheer
scientific zeal and adventurousness to wonder about the unknown realm beyond
those mysterious mountains. As our guarded messages stated, we rested at
midnight after our day of terror and bafflement; but not without a tentative
plan for one or more range-crossing altitude flights in a lightened plane with
aërial camera and geologist’s outfit, beginning the following morning. It was
decided that Danforth and I try it first, and we awaked at 7 A.M. intending an
early trip; though heavy winds—mentioned in our brief bulletin to the outside
world—delayed our start till nearly nine o’clock.
I have already repeated the non-committal story we told the men at camp—and
relayed outside—after our return sixteen hours later. It is now my terrible
duty to amplify this account by filling in the merciful blanks with hints of
what we really saw in the hidden trans-montane world—hints of the revelations
which have finally driven Danforth to a nervous collapse. I wish he would add a
really frank word about the thing which he thinks he alone saw—even though it
was probably a nervous delusion—and which was perhaps the last straw that put
him where he is; but he is firm against that. All I can do is to repeat his
later disjointed whispers about what set him shrieking as the plane soared back
through the wind-tortured mountain pass after that real and tangible shock
which I shared. This will form my last word. If the plain signs of surviving
elder horrors in what I disclose be not enough to keep others from meddling
with the inner antarctic—or at least from prying too deeply beneath the surface
of that ultimate waste of forbidden secrets and unhuman, aeon-cursed
desolation—the responsibility for unnamable and perhaps immensurable evils will
not be mine.
Danforth and I, studying the notes made by Pabodie in his afternoon flight and
checking up with a sextant, had calculated that the lowest available pass in
the range lay somewhat to the right of us, within sight of camp, and about
23,000 or 24,000 feet above sea-level. For this point, then, we first headed in
the lightened plane as we embarked on our flight of discovery. The camp itself,
on foothills which sprang from a high continental plateau, was some 12,000 feet
in altitude; hence the actual height increase necessary was not so vast as it
might seem. Nevertheless we were acutely conscious of the rarefied air and
intense cold as we rose; for on account of visibility conditions we had to
leave the cabin windows open. We were dressed, of course, in our heaviest furs.
As we drew near the forbidding peaks, dark and sinister above the line of
crevasse-riven snow and interstitial glaciers, we noticed more and more the
curiously regular formations clinging to the slopes; and thought again of the
strange Asian paintings of Nicholas Roerich. The ancient and wind-weathered
rock strata fully verified all of Lake’s bulletins, and proved that these hoary
pinnacles had been towering up in exactly the same way since a surprisingly
early time in earth’s history—perhaps over fifty million years. How much higher
they had once been, it was futile to guess; but everything about this strange
region pointed to obscure atmospheric influences unfavourable to change, and
calculated to retard the usual climatic processes of rock disintegration.
But it was the mountainside tangle of regular cubes, ramparts, and cave-mouths
which fascinated and disturbed us most. I studied them with a field-glass and
took aërial photographs whilst Danforth drove; and at times relieved him at the
controls—though my aviation knowledge was purely an amateur’s—in order to let
him use the binoculars. We could easily see that much of the material of the
things was a lightish Archaean quartzite, unlike any formation visible over
broad areas of the general surface; and that their regularity was extreme and
uncanny to an extent which poor Lake had scarcely hinted.
As he had said, their edges were crumbled and rounded from untold aeons of
savage weathering; but their preternatural solidity and tough material had
saved them from obliteration. Many parts, especially those closest to the
slopes, seemed identical in substance with the surrounding rock surface. The
whole arrangement looked like the ruins of Machu Picchu in the Andes, or the
primal foundation-walls of Kish as dug up by the Oxford–Field Museum Expedition
in 1929; and both Danforth and I obtained that occasional impression of
separate Cyclopean blocks which Lake had attributed to his flight-companion
Carroll. How to account for such things in this place was frankly beyond me,
and I felt queerly humbled as a geologist. Igneous formations often have
strange regularities—like the famous Giants’ Causeway in Ireland—but this
stupendous range, despite Lake’s original suspicion of smoking cones, was above
all else non-volcanic in evident structure.
The curious cave-mouths, near which the odd formations seemed most abundant,
presented another albeit a lesser puzzle because of their regularity of
outline. They were, as Lake’s bulletin had said, often approximately square or
semicircular; as if the natural orifices had been shaped to greater symmetry by
some magic hand. Their numerousness and wide distribution were remarkable, and
suggested that the whole region was honeycombed with tunnels dissolved out of
limestone strata. Such glimpses as we secured did not extend far within the
caverns, but we saw that they were apparently clear of stalactites and
stalagmites. Outside, those parts of the mountain slopes adjoining the
apertures seemed invariably smooth and regular; and Danforth thought that the
slight cracks and pittings of the weathering tended toward unusual patterns.
Filled as he was with the horrors and strangenesses discovered at the camp, he
hinted that the pittings vaguely resembled those baffling groups of dots
sprinkled over the primeval greenish soapstones, so hideously duplicated on the
madly conceived snow mounds above those six buried monstrosities.
We had risen gradually in flying over the higher foothills and along toward the
relatively low pass we had selected. As we advanced we occasionally looked down
at the snow and ice of the land route, wondering whether we could have
attempted the trip with the simpler equipment of earlier days. Somewhat to our
surprise we saw that the terrain was far from difficult as such things go; and
that despite the crevasses and other bad spots it would not have been likely to
deter the sledges of a Scott, a Shackleton, or an Amundsen. Some of the
glaciers appeared to lead up to wind-bared passes with unusual continuity, and
upon reaching our chosen pass we found that its case formed no exception.
Our sensations of tense expectancy as we prepared to round the crest and peer
out over an untrodden world can hardly be described on paper; even though we
had no cause to think the regions beyond the range essentially different from
those already seen and traversed. The touch of evil mystery in these barrier
mountains, and in the beckoning sea of opalescent sky glimpsed betwixt their
summits, was a highly subtle and attenuated matter not to be explained in
literal words. Rather was it an affair of vague psychological symbolism and
aesthetic association—a thing mixed up with exotic poetry and paintings, and
with archaic myths lurking in shunned and forbidden volumes. Even the wind’s
burden held a peculiar strain of conscious malignity; and for a second it
seemed that the composite sound included a bizarre musical whistling or piping
over a wide range as the blast swept in and out of the omnipresent and resonant
cave-mouths. There was a cloudy note of reminiscent repulsion in this sound, as
complex and unplaceable as any of the other dark impressions.
We were now, after a slow ascent, at a height of 23,570 feet according to the
aneroid; and had left the region of clinging snow definitely below us. Up here
were only dark, bare rock slopes and the start of rough-ribbed glaciers—but
with those provocative cubes, ramparts, and echoing cave-mouths to add a
portent of the unnatural, the fantastic, and the dream-like. Looking along the
line of high peaks, I thought I could see the one mentioned by poor Lake, with
a rampart exactly on top. It seemed to be half-lost in a queer antarctic haze;
such a haze, perhaps, as had been responsible for Lake’s early notion of
volcanism. The pass loomed directly before us, smooth and windswept between its
jagged and malignly frowning pylons. Beyond it was a sky fretted with swirling
vapours and lighted by the low polar sun—the sky of that mysterious farther
realm upon which we felt no human eye had ever gazed.
A few more feet of altitude and we would behold that realm. Danforth and I,
unable to speak except in shouts amidst the howling, piping wind that raced
through the pass and added to the noise of the unmuffled engines, exchanged
eloquent glances. And then, having gained those last few feet, we did indeed
stare across the momentous divide and over the unsampled secrets of an elder
and utterly alien earth.

V.

I think that both of us simultaneously cried out in mixed awe, wonder, terror,
and disbelief in our own senses as we finally cleared the pass and saw what lay
beyond. Of course we must have had some natural theory in the back of our heads
to steady our faculties for the moment. Probably we thought of such things as
the grotesquely weathered stones of the Garden of the Gods in Colorado, or the
fantastically symmetrical wind-carved rocks of the Arizona desert. Perhaps we
even half thought the sight a mirage like that we had seen the morning before
on first approaching those mountains of madness. We must have had some such
normal notions to fall back upon as our eyes swept that limitless,
tempest-scarred plateau and grasped the almost endless labyrinth of colossal,
regular, and geometrically eurhythmic stone masses which reared their crumbled
and pitted crests above a glacial sheet not more than forty or fifty feet deep
at its thickest, and in places obviously thinner.
The effect of the monstrous sight was indescribable, for some fiendish
violation of known natural law seemed certain at the outset. Here, on a
hellishly ancient table-land fully 20,000 feet high, and in a climate deadly to
habitation since a pre-human age not less than 500,000 years ago, there
stretched nearly to the vision’s limit a tangle of orderly stone which only the
desperation of mental self-defence could possibly attribute to any but a
conscious and artificial cause. We had previously dismissed, so far as serious
thought was concerned, any theory that the cubes and ramparts of the
mountainsides were other than natural in origin. How could they be otherwise,
when man himself could scarcely have been differentiated from the great apes at
the time when this region succumbed to the present unbroken reign of glacial
death?
Yet now the sway of reason seemed irrefutably shaken, for this Cyclopean maze
of squared, curved, and angled blocks had features which cut off all
comfortable refuge. It was, very clearly, the blasphemous city of the mirage in
stark, objective, and ineluctable reality. That damnable portent had had a
material basis after all—there had been some horizontal stratum of ice-dust in
the upper air, and this shocking stone survival had projected its image across
the mountains according to the simple laws of reflection. Of course the phantom
had been twisted and exaggerated, and had contained things which the real
source did not contain; yet now, as we saw that real source, we thought it even
more hideous and menacing than its distant image.
Only the incredible, unhuman massiveness of these vast stone towers and
ramparts had saved the frightful thing from utter annihilation in the hundreds
of thousands—perhaps millions—of years it had brooded there amidst the blasts
of a bleak upland. “Corona Mundi . . . Roof of the World . . .” All sorts of
fantastic phrases sprang to our lips as we looked dizzily down at the
unbelievable spectacle. I thought again of the eldritch primal myths that had
so persistently haunted me since my first sight of this dead antarctic world—of
the daemoniac plateau of Leng, of the Mi-Go, or Abominable Snow-Men of the
Himalayas, of the Pnakotic Manuscripts with their pre-human implications, of
the Cthulhu cult, of the Necronomicon, and of the Hyperborean legends of
formless Tsathoggua and the worse than formless star-spawn associated with that
semi-entity.
For boundless miles in every direction the thing stretched off with very little
thinning; indeed, as our eyes followed it to the right and left along the base
of the low, gradual foothills which separated it from the actual mountain rim,
we decided that we could see no thinning at all except for an interruption at
the left of the pass through which we had come. We had merely struck, at
random, a limited part of something of incalculable extent. The foothills were
more sparsely sprinkled with grotesque stone structures, linking the terrible
city to the already familiar cubes and ramparts which evidently formed its
mountain outposts. These latter, as well as the queer cave-mouths, were as
thick on the inner as on the outer sides of the mountains.
The nameless stone labyrinth consisted, for the most part, of walls from 10 to
150 feet in ice-clear height, and of a thickness varying from five to ten feet.
It was composed mostly of prodigious blocks of dark primordial slate, schist,
and sandstone—blocks in many cases as large as 4 × 6 × 8 feet—though in several
places it seemed to be carved out of a solid, uneven bed-rock of pre-Cambrian
slate. The buildings were far from equal in size; there being innumerable
honeycomb-arrangements of enormous extent as well as smaller separate
structures. The general shape of these things tended to be conical, pyramidal,
or terraced; though there were many perfect cylinders, perfect cubes, clusters
of cubes, and other rectangular forms, and a peculiar sprinkling of angled
edifices whose five-pointed ground plan roughly suggested modern
fortifications. The builders had made constant and expert use of the principle
of the arch, and domes had probably existed in the city’s heyday.
The whole tangle was monstrously weathered, and the glacial surface from which
the towers projected was strewn with fallen blocks and immemorial debris. Where
the glaciation was transparent we could see the lower parts of the gigantic
piles, and noticed the ice-preserved stone bridges which connected the
different towers at varying distances above the ground. On the exposed walls we
could detect the scarred places where other and higher bridges of the same sort
had existed. Closer inspection revealed countless largish windows; some of
which were closed with shutters of a petrified material originally wood, though
most gaped open in a sinister and menacing fashion. Many of the ruins, of
course, were roofless, and with uneven though wind-rounded upper edges; whilst
others, of a more sharply conical or pyramidal model or else protected by
higher surrounding structures, preserved intact outlines despite the
omnipresent crumbling and pitting. With the field-glass we could barely make
out what seemed to be sculptural decorations in horizontal bands—decorations
including those curious groups of dots whose presence on the ancient soapstones
now assumed a vastly larger significance.
In many places the buildings were totally ruined and the ice-sheet deeply riven
from various geologic causes. In other places the stonework was worn down to
the very level of the glaciation. One broad swath, extending from the plateau’s
interior to a cleft in the foothills about a mile to the left of the pass we
had traversed, was wholly free from buildings; and probably represented, we
concluded, the course of some great river which in Tertiary times—millions of
years ago—had poured through the city and into some prodigious subterranean
abyss of the great barrier range. Certainly, this was above all a region of
caves, gulfs, and underground secrets beyond human penetration.
Looking back to our sensations, and recalling our dazedness at viewing this
monstrous survival from aeons we had thought pre-human, I can only wonder that
we preserved the semblance of equilibrium which we did. Of course we knew that
something—chronology, scientific theory, or our own consciousness—was woefully
awry; yet we kept enough poise to guide the plane, observe many things quite
minutely, and take a careful series of photographs which may yet serve both us
and the world in good stead. In my case, ingrained scientific habit may have
helped; for above all my bewilderment and sense of menace there burned a
dominant curiosity to fathom more of this age-old secret—to know what sort of
beings had built and lived in this incalculably gigantic place, and what
relation to the general world of its time or of other times so unique a
concentration of life could have had.
For this place could be no ordinary city. It must have formed the primary
nucleus and centre of some archaic and unbelievable chapter of earth’s history
whose outward ramifications, recalled only dimly in the most obscure and
distorted myths, had vanished utterly amidst the chaos of terrene convulsions
long before any human race we know had shambled out of apedom. Here sprawled a
palaeogean megalopolis compared with which the fabled Atlantis and Lemuria,
Commoriom and Uzuldaroum, and Olathoë in the land of Lomar are recent things of
today—not even of yesterday; a megalopolis ranking with such whispered
pre-human blasphemies as Valusia, R’lyeh, Ib in the land of Mnar, and the
Nameless City of Arabia Deserta. As we flew above that tangle of stark titan
towers my imagination sometimes escaped all bounds and roved aimlessly in
realms of fantastic associations—even weaving links betwixt this lost world and
some of my own wildest dreams concerning the mad horror at the camp.
The plane’s fuel-tank, in the interest of greater lightness, had been only
partly filled; hence we now had to exert caution in our explorations. Even so,
however, we covered an enormous extent of ground—or rather, air—after swooping
down to a level where the wind became virtually negligible. There seemed to be
no limit to the mountain-range, or to the length of the frightful stone city
which bordered its inner foothills. Fifty miles of flight in each direction
shewed no major change in the labyrinth of rock and masonry that clawed up
corpse-like through the eternal ice. There were, though, some highly absorbing
diversifications; such as the carvings on the canyon where that broad river had
once pierced the foothills and approached its sinking-place in the great range.
The headlands at the stream’s entrance had been boldly carved into Cyclopean
pylons; and something about the ridgy, barrel-shaped designs stirred up oddly
vague, hateful, and confusing semi-remembrances in both Danforth and me.
We also came upon several star-shaped open spaces, evidently public squares;
and noted various undulations in the terrain. Where a sharp hill rose, it was
generally hollowed out into some sort of rambling stone edifice; but there were
at least two exceptions. Of these latter, one was too badly weathered to
disclose what had been on the jutting eminence, while the other still bore a
fantastic conical monument carved out of the solid rock and roughly resembling
such things as the well-known Snake Tomb in the ancient valley of Petra.
Flying inland from the mountains, we discovered that the city was not of
infinite width, even though its length along the foothills seemed endless.
After about thirty miles the grotesque stone buildings began to thin out, and
in ten more miles we came to an unbroken waste virtually without signs of
sentient artifice. The course of the river beyond the city seemed marked by a
broad depressed line; while the land assumed a somewhat greater ruggedness,
seeming to slope slightly upward as it receded in the mist-hazed west.
So far we had made no landing, yet to leave the plateau without an attempt at
entering some of the monstrous structures would have been inconceivable.
Accordingly we decided to find a smooth place on the foothills near our
navigable pass, there grounding the plane and preparing to do some exploration
on foot. Though these gradual slopes were partly covered with a scattering of
ruins, low flying soon disclosed an ample number of possible landing-places.
Selecting that nearest to the pass, since our next flight would be across the
great range and back to camp, we succeeded about 12:30 P.M. in coming down on a
smooth, hard snowfield wholly devoid of obstacles and well adapted to a swift
and favourable takeoff later on.
It did not seem necessary to protect the plane with a snow banking for so brief
a time and in so comfortable an absence of high winds at this level; hence we
merely saw that the landing skis were safely lodged, and that the vital parts
of the mechanism were guarded against the cold. For our foot journey we
discarded the heaviest of our flying furs, and took with us a small outfit
consisting of pocket compass, hand camera, light provisions, voluminous
notebooks and paper, geologist’s hammer and chisel, specimen-bags, coil of
climbing rope, and powerful electric torches with extra batteries; this
equipment having been carried in the plane on the chance that we might be able
to effect a landing, take ground pictures, make drawings and topographical
sketches, and obtain rock specimens from some bare slope, outcropping, or
mountain cave. Fortunately we had a supply of extra paper to tear up, place in
a spare specimen-bag, and use on the ancient principle of hare-and-hounds for
marking our course in any interior mazes we might be able to penetrate. This
had been brought in case we found some cave system with air quiet enough to
allow such a rapid and easy method in place of the usual rock-chipping method
of trail-blazing.
Walking cautiously downhill over the crusted snow toward the stupendous stone
labyrinth that loomed against the opalescent west, we felt almost as keen a
sense of imminent marvels as we had felt on approaching the unfathomed mountain
pass four hours previously. True, we had become visually familiar with the
incredible secret concealed by the barrier peaks; yet the prospect of actually
entering primordial walls reared by conscious beings perhaps millions of years
ago—before any known race of men could have existed—was none the less awesome
and potentially terrible in its implications of cosmic abnormality. Though the
thinness of the air at this prodigious altitude made exertion somewhat more
difficult than usual; both Danforth and I found ourselves bearing up very well,
and felt equal to almost any task which might fall to our lot. It took only a
few steps to bring us to a shapeless ruin worn level with the snow, while ten
or fifteen rods farther on there was a huge roofless rampart still complete in
its gigantic five-pointed outline and rising to an irregular height of ten or
eleven feet. For this latter we headed; and when at last we were able actually
to touch its weathered Cyclopean blocks, we felt that we had established an
unprecedented and almost blasphemous link with forgotten aeons normally closed
to our species.
This rampart, shaped like a star and perhaps 300 feet from point to point, was
built of Jurassic sandstone blocks of irregular size, averaging 6 × 8 feet in
surface. There was a row of arched loopholes or windows about four feet wide
and five feet high; spaced quite symmetrically along the points of the star and
at its inner angles, and with the bottoms about four feet from the glaciated
surface. Looking through these, we could see that the masonry was fully five
feet thick, that there were no partitions remaining within, and that there were
traces of banded carvings or bas-reliefs on the interior walls; facts we had
indeed guessed before, when flying low over this rampart and others like it.
Though lower parts must have originally existed, all traces of such things were
now wholly obscured by the deep layer of ice and snow at this point.
We crawled through one of the windows and vainly tried to decipher the nearly
effaced mural designs, but did not attempt to disturb the glaciated floor. Our
orientation flights had indicated that many buildings in the city proper were
less ice-choked, and that we might perhaps find wholly clear interiors leading
down to the true ground level if we entered those structures still roofed at
the top. Before we left the rampart we photographed it carefully, and studied
its mortarless Cyclopean masonry with complete bewilderment. We wished that
Pabodie were present, for his engineering knowledge might have helped us guess
how such titanic blocks could have been handled in that unbelievably remote age
when the city and its outskirts were built up.
The half-mile walk downhill to the actual city, with the upper wind shrieking
vainly and savagely through the skyward peaks in the background, was something
whose smallest details will always remain engraved on my mind. Only in
fantastic nightmares could any human beings but Danforth and me conceive such
optical effects. Between us and the churning vapours of the west lay that
monstrous tangle of dark stone towers; its outré and incredible forms
impressing us afresh at every new angle of vision. It was a mirage in solid
stone, and were it not for the photographs I would still doubt that such a
thing could be. The general type of masonry was identical with that of the
rampart we had examined; but the extravagant shapes which this masonry took in
its urban manifestations were past all description.
Even the pictures illustrate only one or two phases of its infinite bizarrerie,
endless variety, preternatural massiveness, and utterly alien exoticism. There
were geometrical forms for which an Euclid could scarcely find a name—cones of
all degrees of irregularity and truncation; terraces of every sort of
provocative disproportion; shafts with odd bulbous enlargements; broken columns
in curious groups; and five-pointed or five-ridged arrangements of mad
grotesqueness. As we drew nearer we could see beneath certain transparent parts
of the ice-sheet, and detect some of the tubular stone bridges that connected
the crazily sprinkled structures at various heights. Of orderly streets there
seemed to be none, the only broad open swath being a mile to the left, where
the ancient river had doubtless flowed through the town into the mountains.
Our field-glasses shewed the external horizontal bands of nearly effaced
sculptures and dot-groups to be very prevalent, and we could half imagine what
the city must once have looked like—even though most of the roofs and
tower-tops had necessarily perished. As a whole, it had been a complex tangle
of twisted lanes and alleys; all of them deep canyons, and some little better
than tunnels because of the overhanging masonry or overarching bridges. Now,
outspread below us, it loomed like a dream-phantasy against a westward mist
through whose northern end the low, reddish antarctic sun of early afternoon
was struggling to shine; and when for a moment that sun encountered a denser
obstruction and plunged the scene into temporary shadow, the effect was subtly
menacing in a way I can never hope to depict. Even the faint howling and piping
of the unfelt wind in the great mountain passes behind us took on a wilder note
of purposeful malignity. The last stage of our descent to the town was
unusually steep and abrupt, and a rock outcropping at the edge where the grade
changed led us to think that an artificial terrace had once existed there.
Under the glaciation, we believed, there must be a flight of steps or its
equivalent.
When at last we plunged into the labyrinthine town itself, clambering over
fallen masonry and shrinking from the oppressive nearness and dwarfing height
of omnipresent crumbling and pitted walls, our sensations again became such
that I marvel at the amount of self-control we retained. Danforth was frankly
jumpy, and began making some offensively irrelevant speculations about the
horror at the camp—which I resented all the more because I could not help
sharing certain conclusions forced upon us by many features of this morbid
survival from nightmare antiquity. The speculations worked on his imagination,
too; for in one place—where a debris-littered alley turned a sharp corner—he
insisted that he saw faint traces of ground markings which he did not like;
whilst elsewhere he stopped to listen to a subtle imaginary sound from some
undefined point—a muffled musical piping, he said, not unlike that of the wind
in the mountain caves yet somehow disturbingly different. The ceaseless
five-pointedness of the surrounding architecture and of the few distinguishable
mural arabesques had a dimly sinister suggestiveness we could not escape; and
gave us a touch of terrible subconscious certainty concerning the primal
entities which had reared and dwelt in this unhallowed place.
Nevertheless our scientific and adventurous souls were not wholly dead; and we
mechanically carried out our programme of chipping specimens from all the
different rock types represented in the masonry. We wished a rather full set in
order to draw better conclusions regarding the age of the place. Nothing in the
great outer walls seemed to date from later than the Jurassic and Comanchian
periods, nor was any piece of stone in the entire place of a greater recency
than the Pliocene age. In stark certainty, we were wandering amidst a death
which had reigned at least 500,000 years, and in all probability even longer.
As we proceeded through this maze of stone-shadowed twilight we stopped at all
available apertures to study interiors and investigate entrance possibilities.
Some were above our reach, whilst others led only into ice-choked ruins as
unroofed and barren as the rampart on the hill. One, though spacious and
inviting, opened on a seemingly bottomless abyss without visible means of
descent. Now and then we had a chance to study the petrified wood of a
surviving shutter, and were impressed by the fabulous antiquity implied in the
still discernible grain. These things had come from Mesozoic gymnosperms and
conifers—especially Cretaceous cycads—and from fan-palms and early angiosperms
of plainly Tertiary date. Nothing definitely later than the Pliocene could be
discovered. In the placing of these shutters—whose edges shewed the former
presence of queer and long-vanished hinges—usage seemed to be varied; some
being on the outer and some on the inner side of the deep embrasures. They
seemed to have become wedged in place, thus surviving the rusting of their
former and probably metallic fixtures and fastenings.
After a time we came across a row of windows—in the bulges of a colossal
five-ridged cone of undamaged apex—which led into a vast, well-preserved room
with stone flooring; but these were too high in the room to permit of descent
without a rope. We had a rope with us, but did not wish to bother with this
twenty-foot drop unless obliged to—especially in this thin plateau air where
great demands were made upon the heart action. This enormous room was probably
a hall or concourse of some sort, and our electric torches shewed bold,
distinct, and potentially startling sculptures arranged round the walls in
broad, horizontal bands separated by equally broad strips of conventional
arabesques. We took careful note of this spot, planning to enter here unless a
more easily gained interior were encountered.
Finally, though, we did encounter exactly the opening we wished; an archway
about six feet wide and ten feet high, marking the former end of an aërial
bridge which had spanned an alley about five feet above the present level of
glaciation. These archways, of course, were flush with upper-story floors; and
in this case one of the floors still existed. The building thus accessible was
a series of rectangular terraces on our left facing westward. That across the
alley, where the other archway yawned, was a decrepit cylinder with no windows
and with a curious bulge about ten feet above the aperture. It was totally dark
inside, and the archway seemed to open on a well of illimitable emptiness.
Heaped debris made the entrance to the vast left-hand building doubly easy, yet
for a moment we hesitated before taking advantage of the long-wished chance.
For though we had penetrated into this tangle of archaic mystery, it required
fresh resolution to carry us actually inside a complete and surviving building
of a fabulous elder world whose nature was becoming more and more hideously
plain to us. In the end, however, we made the plunge; and scrambled up over the
rubble into the gaping embrasure. The floor beyond was of great slate slabs,
and seemed to form the outlet of a long, high corridor with sculptured walls.
Observing the many inner archways which led off from it, and realising the
probable complexity of the nest of apartments within, we decided that we must
begin our system of hare-and-hound trail-blazing. Hitherto our compasses,
together with frequent glimpses of the vast mountain-range between the towers
in our rear, had been enough to prevent our losing our way; but from now on,
the artificial substitute would be necessary. Accordingly we reduced our extra
paper to shreds of suitable size, placed these in a bag to be carried by
Danforth, and prepared to use them as economically as safety would allow. This
method would probably gain us immunity from straying, since there did not
appear to be any strong air-currents inside the primordial masonry. If such
should develop, or if our paper supply should give out, we could of course fall
back on the more secure though more tedious and retarding method of
rock-chipping.
Just how extensive a territory we had opened up, it was impossible to guess
without a trial. The close and frequent connexion of the different buildings
made it likely that we might cross from one to another on bridges underneath
the ice except where impeded by local collapses and geologic rifts, for very
little glaciation seemed to have entered the massive constructions. Almost all
the areas of transparent ice had revealed the submerged windows as tightly
shuttered, as if the town had been left in that uniform state until the glacial
sheet came to crystallise the lower part for all succeeding time. Indeed, one
gained a curious impression that this place had been deliberately closed and
deserted in some dim, bygone aeon, rather than overwhelmed by any sudden
calamity or even gradual decay. Had the coming of the ice been foreseen, and
had a nameless population left en masse to seek a less doomed abode? The
precise physiographic conditions attending the formation of the ice-sheet at
this point would have to wait for later solution. It had not, very plainly,
been a grinding drive. Perhaps the pressure of accumulated snows had been
responsible; and perhaps some flood from the river, or from the bursting of
some ancient glacial dam in the great range, had helped to create the special
state now observable. Imagination could conceive almost anything in connexion
with this place.

VI.

It would be cumbrous to give a detailed, consecutive account of our wanderings
inside that cavernous, aeon-dead honeycomb of primal masonry; that monstrous
lair of elder secrets which now echoed for the first time, after uncounted
epochs, to the tread of human feet. This is especially true because so much of
the horrible drama and revelation came from a mere study of the omnipresent
mural carvings. Our flashlight photographs of those carvings will do much
toward proving the truth of what we are now disclosing, and it is lamentable
that we had not a larger film supply with us. As it was, we made crude notebook
sketches of certain salient features after all our films were used up.
The building which we had entered was one of great size and elaborateness, and
gave us an impressive notion of the architecture of that nameless geologic
past. The inner partitions were less massive than the outer walls, but on the
lower levels were excellently preserved. Labyrinthine complexity, involving
curiously irregular differences in floor levels, characterised the entire
arrangement; and we should certainly have been lost at the very outset but for
the trail of torn paper left behind us. We decided to explore the more decrepit
upper parts first of all, hence climbed aloft in the maze for a distance of
some 100 feet, to where the topmost tier of chambers yawned snowily and
ruinously open to the polar sky. Ascent was effected over the steep,
transversely ribbed stone ramps or inclined planes which everywhere served in
lieu of stairs. The rooms we encountered were of all imaginable shapes and
proportions, ranging from five-pointed stars to triangles and perfect cubes. It
might be safe to say that their general average was about 30 × 30 feet in floor
area, and 20 feet in height; though many larger apartments existed. After
thoroughly examining the upper regions and the glacial level we descended story
by story into the submerged part, where indeed we soon saw we were in a
continuous maze of connected chambers and passages probably leading over
unlimited areas outside this particular building. The Cyclopean massiveness and
giganticism of everything about us became curiously oppressive; and there was
something vaguely but deeply unhuman in all the contours, dimensions,
proportions, decorations, and constructional nuances of the blasphemously
archaic stonework. We soon realised from what the carvings revealed that this
monstrous city was many million years old.
We cannot yet explain the engineering principles used in the anomalous
balancing and adjustment of the vast rock masses, though the function of the
arch was clearly much relied on. The rooms we visited were wholly bare of all
portable contents, a circumstance which sustained our belief in the city’s
deliberate desertion. The prime decorative feature was the almost universal
system of mural sculpture; which tended to run in continuous horizontal bands
three feet wide and arranged from floor to ceiling in alternation with bands of
equal width given over to geometrical arabesques. There were exceptions to this
rule of arrangement, but its preponderance was overwhelming. Often, however, a
series of smooth cartouches containing oddly patterned groups of dots would be
sunk along one of the arabesque bands.
The technique, we soon saw, was mature, accomplished, and aesthetically evolved
to the highest degree of civilised mastery; though utterly alien in every
detail to any known art tradition of the human race. In delicacy of execution
no sculpture I have ever seen could approach it. The minutest details of
elaborate vegetation, or of animal life, were rendered with astonishing
vividness despite the bold scale of the carvings; whilst the conventional
designs were marvels of skilful intricacy. The arabesques displayed a profound
use of mathematical principles, and were made up of obscurely symmetrical
curves and angles based on the quantity of five. The pictorial bands followed a
highly formalised tradition, and involved a peculiar treatment of perspective;
but had an artistic force that moved us profoundly notwithstanding the
intervening gulf of vast geologic periods. Their method of design hinged on a
singular juxtaposition of the cross-section with the two-dimensional
silhouette, and embodied an analytical psychology beyond that of any known race
of antiquity. It is useless to try to compare this art with any represented in
our museums. Those who see our photographs will probably find its closest
analogue in certain grotesque conceptions of the most daring futurists.
The arabesque tracery consisted altogether of depressed lines whose depth on
unweathered walls varied from one to two inches. When cartouches with
dot-groups appeared—evidently as inscriptions in some unknown and primordial
language and alphabet—the depression of the smooth surface was perhaps an inch
and a half, and of the dots perhaps a half-inch more. The pictorial bands were
in counter-sunk low relief, their background being depressed about two inches
from the original wall surface. In some specimens marks of a former colouration
could be detected, though for the most part the untold aeons had disintegrated
and banished any pigments which may have been applied. The more one studied the
marvellous technique the more one admired the things. Beneath their strict
conventionalisation one could grasp the minute and accurate observation and
graphic skill of the artists; and indeed, the very conventions themselves
served to symbolise and accentuate the real essence or vital differentiation of
every object delineated. We felt, too, that besides these recognisable
excellences there were others lurking beyond the reach of our perceptions.
Certain touches here and there gave vague hints of latent symbols and stimuli
which another mental and emotional background, and a fuller or different
sensory equipment, might have made of profound and poignant significance to us.
The subject-matter of the sculptures obviously came from the life of the
vanished epoch of their creation, and contained a large proportion of evident
history. It is this abnormal historic-mindedness of the primal race—a chance
circumstance operating, through coincidence, miraculously in our favour—which
made the carvings so awesomely informative to us, and which caused us to place
their photography and transcription above all other considerations. In certain
rooms the dominant arrangement was varied by the presence of maps, astronomical
charts, and other scientific designs on an enlarged scale—these things giving a
naive and terrible corroboration to what we gathered from the pictorial friezes
and dadoes. In hinting at what the whole revealed, I can only hope that my
account will not arouse a curiosity greater than sane caution on the part of
those who believe me at all. It would be tragic if any were to be allured to
that realm of death and horror by the very warning meant to discourage them.
Interrupting these sculptured walls were high windows and massive twelve-foot
doorways; both now and then retaining the petrified wooden planks—elaborately
carved and polished—of the actual shutters and doors. All metal fixtures had
long ago vanished, but some of the doors remained in place and had to be forced
aside as we progressed from room to room. Window-frames with odd transparent
panes—mostly elliptical—survived here and there, though in no considerable
quantity. There were also frequent niches of great magnitude, generally empty,
but once in a while containing some bizarre object carved from green soapstone
which was either broken or perhaps held too inferior to warrant removal. Other
apertures were undoubtedly connected with bygone mechanical facilities—heating,
lighting, and the like—of a sort suggested in many of the carvings. Ceilings
tended to be plain, but had sometimes been inlaid with green soapstone or other
tiles, mostly fallen now. Floors were also paved with such tiles, though plain
stonework predominated.
As I have said, all furniture and other moveables were absent; but the
sculptures gave a clear idea of the strange devices which had once filled these
tomb-like, echoing rooms. Above the glacial sheet the floors were generally
thick with detritus, litter, and debris; but farther down this condition
decreased. In some of the lower chambers and corridors there was little more
than gritty dust or ancient incrustations, while occasional areas had an
uncanny air of newly swept immaculateness. Of course, where rifts or collapses
had occurred, the lower levels were as littered as the upper ones. A central
court—as in other structures we had seen from the air—saved the inner regions
from total darkness; so that we seldom had to use our electric torches in the
upper rooms except when studying sculptured details. Below the ice-cap,
however, the twilight deepened; and in many parts of the tangled ground level
there was an approach to absolute blackness.
To form even a rudimentary idea of our thoughts and feelings as we penetrated
this aeon-silent maze of unhuman masonry one must correlate a hopelessly
bewildering chaos of fugitive moods, memories, and impressions. The sheer
appalling antiquity and lethal desolation of the place were enough to overwhelm
almost any sensitive person, but added to these elements were the recent
unexplained horror at the camp, and the revelations all too soon effected by
the terrible mural sculptures around us. The moment we came upon a perfect
section of carving, where no ambiguity of interpretation could exist, it took
only a brief study to give us the hideous truth—a truth which it would be naive
to claim Danforth and I had not independently suspected before, though we had
carefully refrained from even hinting it to each other. There could now be no
further merciful doubt about the nature of the beings which had built and
inhabited this monstrous dead city millions of years ago, when man’s ancestors
were primitive archaic mammals, and vast dinosaurs roamed the tropical steppes
of Europe and Asia.
We had previously clung to a desperate alternative and insisted—each to
himself—that the omnipresence of the five-pointed motif meant only some
cultural or religious exaltation of the Archaean natural object which had so
patently embodied the quality of five-pointedness; as the decorative motifs of
Minoan Crete exalted the sacred bull, those of Egypt the scarabaeus, those of
Rome the wolf and the eagle, and those of various savage tribes some chosen
totem-animal. But this lone refuge was now stripped from us, and we were forced
to face definitely the reason-shaking realisation which the reader of these
pages has doubtless long ago anticipated. I can scarcely bear to write it down
in black and white even now, but perhaps that will not be necessary.
The things once rearing and dwelling in this frightful masonry in the age of
dinosaurs were not indeed dinosaurs, but far worse. Mere dinosaurs were new and
almost brainless objects—but the builders of the city were wise and old, and
had left certain traces in rocks even then laid down well-nigh a thousand
million years . . . rocks laid down before the true life of earth had advanced
beyond plastic groups of cells . . . rocks laid down before the true life of
earth had existed at all. They were the makers and enslavers of that life, and
above all doubt the originals of the fiendish elder myths which things like the
Pnakotic Manuscripts and the Necronomicon affrightedly hint about. They were
the Great Old Ones that had filtered down from the stars when earth was
young—the beings whose substance an alien evolution had shaped, and whose
powers were such as this planet had never bred. And to think that only the day
before Danforth and I had actually looked upon fragments of their millennially
fossilised substance . . . and that poor Lake and his party had seen their
complete outlines. . . .
It is of course impossible for me to relate in proper order the stages by which
we picked up what we know of that monstrous chapter of pre-human life. After
the first shock of the certain revelation we had to pause a while to
recuperate, and it was fully three o’clock before we got started on our actual
tour of systematic research. The sculptures in the building we entered were of
relatively late date—perhaps two million years ago—as checked up by geological,
biological, and astronomical features; and embodied an art which would be
called decadent in comparison with that of specimens we found in older
buildings after crossing bridges under the glacial sheet. One edifice hewn from
the solid rock seemed to go back forty or possibly even fifty million years—to
the lower Eocene or upper Cretaceous—and contained bas-reliefs of an artistry
surpassing anything else, with one tremendous exception, that we encountered.
That was, we have since agreed, the oldest domestic structure we traversed.
Were it not for the support of those flashlights soon to be made public, I
would refrain from telling what I found and inferred, lest I be confined as a
madman. Of course, the infinitely early parts of the patchwork
tale—representing the pre-terrestrial life of the star-headed beings on other
planets, and in other galaxies, and in other universes—can readily be
interpreted as the fantastic mythology of those beings themselves; yet such
parts sometimes involved designs and diagrams so uncannily close to the latest
findings of mathematics and astrophysics that I scarcely know what to think.
Let others judge when they see the photographs I shall publish.
Naturally, no one set of carvings which we encountered told more than a
fraction of any connected story; nor did we even begin to come upon the various
stages of that story in their proper order. Some of the vast rooms were
independent units so far as their designs were concerned, whilst in other cases
a continuous chronicle would be carried through a series of rooms and
corridors. The best of the maps and diagrams were on the walls of a frightful
abyss below even the ancient ground level—a cavern perhaps 200 feet square and
sixty feet high, which had almost undoubtedly been an educational centre of
some sort. There were many provoking repetitions of the same material in
different rooms and buildings; since certain chapters of experience, and
certain summaries or phases of racial history, had evidently been favourites
with different decorators or dwellers. Sometimes, though, variant versions of
the same theme proved useful in settling debatable points and filling in gaps.
I still wonder that we deduced so much in the short time at our disposal. Of
course, we even now have only the barest outline; and much of that was obtained
later on from a study of the photographs and sketches we made. It may be the
effect of this later study—the revived memories and vague impressions acting in
conjunction with his general sensitiveness and with that final supposed
horror-glimpse whose essence he will not reveal even to me—which has been the
immediate source of Danforth’s present breakdown. But it had to be; for we
could not issue our warning intelligently without the fullest possible
information, and the issuance of that warning is a prime necessity. Certain
lingering influences in that unknown antarctic world of disordered time and
alien natural law make it imperative that further exploration be discouraged.

VII.

The full story, so far as deciphered, will shortly appear in an official
bulletin of Miskatonic University. Here I shall sketch only the salient high
lights in a formless, rambling way. Myth or otherwise, the sculptures told of
the coming of those star-headed things to the nascent, lifeless earth out of
cosmic space—their coming, and the coming of many other alien entities such as
at certain times embark upon spatial pioneering. They seemed able to traverse
the interstellar ether on their vast membraneous wings—thus oddly confirming
some curious hill folklore long ago told me by an antiquarian colleague. They
had lived under the sea a good deal, building fantastic cities and fighting
terrific battles with nameless adversaries by means of intricate devices
employing unknown principles of energy. Evidently their scientific and
mechanical knowledge far surpassed man’s today, though they made use of its
more widespread and elaborate forms only when obliged to. Some of the
sculptures suggested that they had passed through a stage of mechanised life on
other planets, but had receded upon finding its effects emotionally
unsatisfying. Their preternatural toughness of organisation and simplicity of
natural wants made them peculiarly able to live on a high plane without the
more specialised fruits of artificial manufacture, and even without garments
except for occasional protection against the elements.
It was under the sea, at first for food and later for other purposes, that they
first created earth-life—using available substances according to long-known
methods. The more elaborate experiments came after the annihilation of various
cosmic enemies. They had done the same thing on other planets; having
manufactured not only necessary foods, but certain multicellular protoplasmic
masses capable of moulding their tissues into all sorts of temporary organs
under hypnotic influence and thereby forming ideal slaves to perform the heavy
work of the community. These viscous masses were without doubt what Abdul
Alhazred whispered about as the “shoggoths” in his frightful Necronomicon,
though even that mad Arab had not hinted that any existed on earth except in
the dreams of those who had chewed a certain alkaloidal herb. When the
star-headed Old Ones on this planet had synthesised their simple food forms and
bred a good supply of shoggoths, they allowed other cell-groups to develop into
other forms of animal and vegetable life for sundry purposes; extirpating any
whose presence became troublesome.
With the aid of the shoggoths, whose expansions could be made to lift
prodigious weights, the small, low cities under the sea grew to vast and
imposing labyrinths of stone not unlike those which later rose on land. Indeed,
the highly adaptable Old Ones had lived much on land in other parts of the
universe, and probably retained many traditions of land construction. As we
studied the architecture of all these sculptured palaeogean cities, including
that whose aeon-dead corridors we were even then traversing, we were impressed
by a curious coincidence which we have not yet tried to explain, even to
ourselves. The tops of the buildings, which in the actual city around us had of
course been weathered into shapeless ruins ages ago, were clearly displayed in
the bas-reliefs; and shewed vast clusters of needle-like spires, delicate
finials on certain cone and pyramid apexes, and tiers of thin, horizontal
scalloped discs capping cylindrical shafts. This was exactly what we had seen
in that monstrous and portentous mirage, cast by a dead city whence such
skyline features had been absent for thousands and tens of thousands of years,
which loomed on our ignorant eyes across the unfathomed mountains of madness as
we first approached poor Lake’s ill-fated camp.
Of the life of the Old Ones, both under the sea and after part of them migrated
to land, volumes could be written. Those in shallow water had continued the
fullest use of the eyes at the ends of their five main head tentacles, and had
practiced the arts of sculpture and of writing in quite the usual way—the
writing accomplished with a stylus on waterproof waxen surfaces. Those lower
down in the ocean depths, though they used a curious phosphorescent organism to
furnish light, pieced out their vision with obscure special senses operating
through the prismatic cilia on their heads—senses which rendered all the Old
Ones partly independent of light in emergencies. Their forms of sculpture and
writing had changed curiously during the descent, embodying certain apparently
chemical coating processes—probably to secure phosphorescence—which the
bas-reliefs could not make clear to us. The beings moved in the sea partly by
swimming—using the lateral crinoid arms—and partly by wriggling with the lower
tier of tentacles containing the pseudo-feet. Occasionally they accomplished
long swoops with the auxiliary use of two or more sets of their fan-like
folding wings. On land they locally used the pseudo-feet, but now and then flew
to great heights or over long distances with their wings. The many slender
tentacles into which the crinoid arms branched were infinitely delicate,
flexible, strong, and accurate in muscular-nervous coördination; ensuring the
utmost skill and dexterity in all artistic and other manual operations.
The toughness of the things was almost incredible. Even the terrific pressures
of the deepest sea-bottoms appeared powerless to harm them. Very few seemed to
die at all except by violence, and their burial-places were very limited. The
fact that they covered their vertically inhumed dead with five-pointed
inscribed mounds set up thoughts in Danforth and me which made a fresh pause
and recuperation necessary after the sculptures revealed it. The beings
multiplied by means of spores—like vegetable pteridophytes as Lake had
suspected—but owing to their prodigious toughness and longevity, and consequent
lack of replacement needs, they did not encourage the large-scale development
of new prothalli except when they had new regions to colonise. The young
matured swiftly, and received an education evidently beyond any standard we can
imagine. The prevailing intellectual and aesthetic life was highly evolved, and
produced a tenaciously enduring set of customs and institutions which I shall
describe more fully in my coming monograph. These varied slightly according to
sea or land residence, but had the same foundations and essentials.
Though able, like vegetables, to derive nourishment from inorganic substances;
they vastly preferred organic and especially animal food. They ate uncooked
marine life under the sea, but cooked their viands on land. They hunted game
and raised meat herds—slaughtering with sharp weapons whose odd marks on
certain fossil bones our expedition had noted. They resisted all ordinary
temperatures marvellously; and in their natural state could live in water down
to freezing. When the great chill of the Pleistocene drew on, however—nearly a
million years ago—the land dwellers had to resort to special measures including
artificial heating; until at last the deadly cold appears to have driven them
back into the sea. For their prehistoric flights through cosmic space, legend
said, they had absorbed certain chemicals and became almost independent of
eating, breathing, or heat conditions; but by the time of the great cold they
had lost track of the method. In any case they could not have prolonged the
artificial state indefinitely without harm.
Being non-pairing and semi-vegetable in structure, the Old Ones had no
biological basis for the family phase of mammal life; but seemed to organise
large households on the principles of comfortable space-utility and—as we
deduced from the pictured occupations and diversions of co-dwellers—congenial
mental association. In furnishing their homes they kept everything in the
centre of the huge rooms, leaving all the wall spaces free for decorative
treatment. Lighting, in the case of the land inhabitants, was accomplished by a
device probably electro-chemical in nature. Both on land and under water they
used curious tables, chairs, and couches like cylindrical frames—for they
rested and slept upright with folded-down tentacles—and racks for the hinged
sets of dotted surfaces forming their books.
Government was evidently complex and probably socialistic, though no
certainties in this regard could be deduced from the sculptures we saw. There
was extensive commerce, both local and between different cities; certain small,
flat counters, five-pointed and inscribed, serving as money. Probably the
smaller of the various greenish soapstones found by our expedition were pieces
of such currency. Though the culture was mainly urban, some agriculture and
much stock-raising existed. Mining and a limited amount of manufacturing were
also practiced. Travel was very frequent, but permanent migration seemed
relatively rare except for the vast colonising movements by which the race
expanded. For personal locomotion no external aid was used; since in land, air,
and water movement alike the Old Ones seemed to possess excessively vast
capacities for speed. Loads, however, were drawn by beasts of burden—shoggoths
under the sea, and a curious variety of primitive vertebrates in the later
years of land existence.
These vertebrates, as well as an infinity of other life-forms—animal and
vegetable, marine, terrestrial, and aërial—were the products of unguided
evolution acting on life-cells made by the Old Ones but escaping beyond their
radius of attention. They had been suffered to develop unchecked because they
had not come in conflict with the dominant beings. Bothersome forms, of course,
were mechanically exterminated. It interested us to see in some of the very
last and most decadent sculptures a shambling primitive mammal, used sometimes
for food and sometimes as an amusing buffoon by the land dwellers, whose
vaguely simian and human foreshadowings were unmistakable. In the building of
land cities the huge stone blocks of the high towers were generally lifted by
vast-winged pterodactyls of a species heretofore unknown to palaeontology.
The persistence with which the Old Ones survived various geologic changes and
convulsions of the earth’s crust was little short of miraculous. Though few or
none of their first cities seem to have remained beyond the Archaean age, there
was no interruption in their civilisation or in the transmission of their
records. Their original place of advent to the planet was the Antarctic Ocean,
and it is likely that they came not long after the matter forming the moon was
wrenched from the neighbouring South Pacific. According to one of the
sculptured maps, the whole globe was then under water, with stone cities
scattered farther and farther from the antarctic as aeons passed. Another map
shews a vast bulk of dry land around the south pole, where it is evident that
some of the beings made experimental settlements though their main centres were
transferred to the nearest sea-bottom. Later maps, which display this land mass
as cracking and drifting, and sending certain detached parts northward, uphold
in a striking way the theories of continental drift lately advanced by Taylor,
Wegener, and Joly.
With the upheaval of new land in the South Pacific tremendous events began.
Some of the marine cities were hopelessly shattered, yet that was not the worst
misfortune. Another race—a land race of beings shaped like octopi and probably
corresponding to the fabulous pre-human spawn of Cthulhu—soon began filtering
down from cosmic infinity and precipitated a monstrous war which for a time
drove the Old Ones wholly back to the sea—a colossal blow in view of the
increasing land settlements. Later peace was made, and the new lands were given
to the Cthulhu spawn whilst the Old Ones held the sea and the older lands. New
land cities were founded—the greatest of them in the antarctic, for this region
of first arrival was sacred. From then on, as before, the antarctic remained
the centre of the Old Ones’ civilisation, and all the discoverable cities built
there by the Cthulhu spawn were blotted out. Then suddenly the lands of the
Pacific sank again, taking with them the frightful stone city of R’lyeh and all
the cosmic octopi, so that the Old Ones were again supreme on the planet except
for one shadowy fear about which they did not like to speak. At a rather later
age their cities dotted all the land and water areas of the globe—hence the
recommendation in my coming monograph that some archaeologist make systematic
borings with Pabodie’s type of apparatus in certain widely separated regions.
The steady trend down the ages was from water to land; a movement encouraged by
the rise of new land masses, though the ocean was never wholly deserted.
Another cause of the landward movement was the new difficulty in breeding and
managing the shoggoths upon which successful sea-life depended. With the march
of time, as the sculptures sadly confessed, the art of creating new life from
inorganic matter had been lost; so that the Old Ones had to depend on the
moulding of forms already in existence. On land the great reptiles proved
highly tractable; but the shoggoths of the sea, reproducing by fission and
acquiring a dangerous degree of accidental intelligence, presented for a time a
formidable problem.
They had always been controlled through the hypnotic suggestion of the Old
Ones, and had modelled their tough plasticity into various useful temporary
limbs and organs; but now their self-modelling powers were sometimes exercised
independently, and in various imitative forms implanted by past suggestion.
They had, it seems, developed a semi-stable brain whose separate and
occasionally stubborn volition echoed the will of the Old Ones without always
obeying it. Sculptured images of these shoggoths filled Danforth and me with
horror and loathing. They were normally shapeless entities composed of a
viscous jelly which looked like an agglutination of bubbles; and each averaged
about fifteen feet in diameter when a sphere. They had, however, a constantly
shifting shape and volume; throwing out temporary developments or forming
apparent organs of sight, hearing, and speech in imitation of their masters,
either spontaneously or according to suggestion.
They seem to have become peculiarly intractable toward the middle of the
Permian age, perhaps 150 million years ago, when a veritable war of
re-subjugation was waged upon them by the marine Old Ones. Pictures of this
war, and of the headless, slime-coated fashion in which the shoggoths typically
left their slain victims, held a marvellously fearsome quality despite the
intervening abyss of untold ages. The Old Ones had used curious weapons of
molecular disturbance against the rebel entities, and in the end had achieved a
complete victory. Thereafter the sculptures shewed a period in which shoggoths
were tamed and broken by armed Old Ones as the wild horses of the American west
were tamed by cowboys. Though during the rebellion the shoggoths had shewn an
ability to live out of water, this transition was not encouraged; since their
usefulness on land would hardly have been commensurate with the trouble of
their management.
During the Jurassic age the Old Ones met fresh adversity in the form of a new
invasion from outer space—this time by half-fungous, half-crustacean creatures
from a planet identifiable as the remote and recently discovered Pluto;
creatures undoubtedly the same as those figuring in certain whispered hill
legends of the north, and remembered in the Himalayas as the Mi-Go, or
Abominable Snow-Men. To fight these beings the Old Ones attempted, for the
first time since their terrene advent, to sally forth again into the planetary
ether; but despite all traditional preparations found it no longer possible to
leave the earth’s atmosphere. Whatever the old secret of interstellar travel
had been, it was now definitely lost to the race. In the end the Mi-Go drove
the Old Ones out of all the northern lands, though they were powerless to
disturb those in the sea. Little by little the slow retreat of the elder race
to their original antarctic habitat was beginning.
It was curious to note from the pictured battles that both the Cthulhu spawn
and the Mi-Go seem to have been composed of matter more widely different from
that which we know than was the substance of the Old Ones. They were able to
undergo transformations and reintegrations impossible for their adversaries,
and seem therefore to have originally come from even remoter gulfs of cosmic
space. The Old Ones, but for their abnormal toughness and peculiar vital
properties, were strictly material, and must have had their absolute origin
within the known space-time continuum; whereas the first sources of the other
beings can only be guessed at with bated breath. All this, of course, assuming
that the non-terrestrial linkages and the anomalies ascribed to the invading
foes are not pure mythology. Conceivably, the Old Ones might have invented a
cosmic framework to account for their occasional defeats; since historical
interest and pride obviously formed their chief psychological element. It is
significant that their annals failed to mention many advanced and potent races
of beings whose mighty cultures and towering cities figure persistently in
certain obscure legends.
The changing state of the world through long geologic ages appeared with
startling vividness in many of the sculptured maps and scenes. In certain cases
existing science will require revision, while in other cases its bold
deductions are magnificently confirmed. As I have said, the hypothesis of
Taylor, Wegener, and Joly that all the continents are fragments of an original
antarctic land mass which cracked from centrifugal force and drifted apart over
a technically viscous lower surface—an hypothesis suggested by such things as
the complementary outlines of Africa and South America, and the way the great
mountain chains are rolled and shoved up—receives striking support from this
uncanny source.
Maps evidently shewing the Carboniferous world of an hundred million or more
years ago displayed significant rifts and chasms destined later to separate
Africa from the once continuous realms of Europe (then the Valusia of hellish
primal legend), Asia, the Americas, and the antarctic continent. Other
charts—and most significantly one in connexion with the founding fifty million
years ago of the vast dead city around us—shewed all the present continents
well differentiated. And in the latest discoverable specimen—dating perhaps
from the Pliocene age—the approximate world of today appeared quite clearly
despite the linkage of Alaska with Siberia, of North America with Europe
through Greenland, and of South America with the antarctic continent through
Graham Land. In the Carboniferous map the whole globe—ocean floor and rifted
land mass alike—bore symbols of the Old Ones’ vast stone cities, but in the
later charts the gradual recession toward the antarctic became very plain. The
final Pliocene specimen shewed no land cities except on the antarctic continent
and the tip of South America, nor any ocean cities north of the fiftieth
parallel of South Latitude. Knowledge and interest in the northern world, save
for a study of coast-lines probably made during long exploration flights on
those fan-like membraneous wings, had evidently declined to zero among the Old
Ones.
Destruction of cities through the upthrust of mountains, the centrifugal
rending of continents, the seismic convulsions of land or sea-bottom, and other
natural causes was a matter of common record; and it was curious to observe how
fewer and fewer replacements were made as the ages wore on. The vast dead
megalopolis that yawned around us seemed to be the last general centre of the
race; built early in the Cretaceous age after a titanic earth-buckling had
obliterated a still vaster predecessor not far distant. It appeared that this
general region was the most sacred spot of all, where reputedly the first Old
Ones had settled on a primal sea-bottom. In the new city—many of whose features
we could recognise in the sculptures, but which stretched fully an hundred
miles along the mountain-range in each direction beyond the farthest limits of
our aërial survey—there were reputed to be preserved certain sacred stones
forming part of the first sea-bottom city, which were thrust up to light after
long epochs in the course of the general crumpling of strata.

VIII.

Naturally, Danforth and I studied with especial interest and a peculiarly
personal sense of awe everything pertaining to the immediate district in which
we were. Of this local material there was naturally a vast abundance; and on
the tangled ground level of the city we were lucky enough to find a house of
very late date whose walls, though somewhat damaged by a neighbouring rift,
contained sculptures of decadent workmanship carrying the story of the region
much beyond the period of the Pliocene map whence we derived our last general
glimpse of the pre-human world. This was the last place we examined in detail,
since what we found there gave us a fresh immediate objective.
Certainly, we were in one of the strangest, weirdest, and most terrible of all
the corners of earth’s globe. Of all existing lands it was infinitely the most
ancient; and the conviction grew upon us that this hideous upland must indeed
be the fabled nightmare plateau of Leng which even the mad author of the
Necronomicon was reluctant to discuss. The great mountain chain was
tremendously long—starting as a low range at Luitpold Land on the coast of
Weddell Sea and virtually crossing the entire continent. The really high part
stretched in a mighty arc from about Latitude 82°, E. Longitude 60° to Latitude
70°, E. Longitude 115°, with its concave side toward our camp and its seaward
end in the region of that long, ice-locked coast whose hills were glimpsed by
Wilkes and Mawson at the Antarctic Circle.
Yet even more monstrous exaggerations of Nature seemed disturbingly close at
hand. I have said that these peaks are higher than the Himalayas, but the
sculptures forbid me to say that they are earth’s highest. That grim honour is
beyond doubt reserved for something which half the sculptures hesitated to
record at all, whilst others approached it with obvious repugnance and
trepidation. It seems that there was one part of the ancient land—the first
part that ever rose from the waters after the earth had flung off the moon and
the Old Ones had seeped down from the stars—which had come to be shunned as
vaguely and namelessly evil. Cities built there had crumbled before their time,
and had been found suddenly deserted. Then when the first great earth-buckling
had convulsed the region in the Comanchian age, a frightful line of peaks had
shot suddenly up amidst the most appalling din and chaos—and earth had received
her loftiest and most terrible mountains.
If the scale of the carvings was correct, these abhorred things must have been
much over 40,000 feet high—radically vaster than even the shocking mountains of
madness we had crossed. They extended, it appeared, from about Latitude 77°, E.
Longitude 70° to Latitude 70°, E. Longitude 100°—less than 300 miles away from
the dead city, so that we would have spied their dreaded summits in the dim
western distance had it not been for that vague opalescent haze. Their northern
end must likewise be visible from the long Antarctic Circle coast-line at Queen
Mary Land.
Some of the Old Ones, in the decadent days, had made strange prayers to those
mountains; but none ever went near them or dared to guess what lay beyond. No
human eye had ever seen them, and as I studied the emotions conveyed in the
carvings I prayed that none ever might. There are protecting hills along the
coast beyond them—Queen Mary and Kaiser Wilhelm Lands—and I thank heaven no one
has been able to land and climb those hills. I am not as sceptical about old
tales and fears as I used to be, and I do not laugh now at the pre-human
sculptor’s notion that lightning paused meaningfully now and then at each of
the brooding crests, and that an unexplained glow shone from one of those
terrible pinnacles all through the long polar night. There may be a very real
and very monstrous meaning in the old Pnakotic whispers about Kadath in the
Cold Waste.
But the terrain close at hand was hardly less strange, even if less namelessly
accursed. Soon after the founding of the city the great mountain-range became
the seat of the principal temples, and many carvings shewed what grotesque and
fantastic towers had pierced the sky where now we saw only the curiously
clinging cubes and ramparts. In the course of ages the caves had appeared, and
had been shaped into adjuncts of the temples. With the advance of still later
epochs all the limestone veins of the region were hollowed out by ground
waters, so that the mountains, the foothills, and the plains below them were a
veritable network of connected caverns and galleries. Many graphic sculptures
told of explorations deep underground, and of the final discovery of the
Stygian sunless sea that lurked at earth’s bowels.
This vast nighted gulf had undoubtedly been worn by the great river which
flowed down from the nameless and horrible westward mountains, and which had
formerly turned at the base of the Old Ones’ range and flowed beside that chain
into the Indian Ocean between Budd and Totten Lands on Wilkes’s coast-line.
Little by little it had eaten away the limestone hill base at its turning, till
at last its sapping currents reached the caverns of the ground waters and
joined with them in digging a deeper abyss. Finally its whole bulk emptied into
the hollow hills and left the old bed toward the ocean dry. Much of the later
city as we now found it had been built over that former bed. The Old Ones,
understanding what had happened, and exercising their always keen artistic
sense, had carved into ornate pylons those headlands of the foothills where the
great stream began its descent into eternal darkness.
This river, once crossed by scores of noble stone bridges, was plainly the one
whose extinct course we had seen in our aëroplane survey. Its position in
different carvings of the city helped us to orient ourselves to the scene as it
had been at various stages of the region’s age-long, aeon-dead history; so that
we were able to sketch a hasty but careful map of the salient features—squares,
important buildings, and the like—for guidance in further explorations. We
could soon reconstruct in fancy the whole stupendous thing as it was a million
or ten million or fifty million years ago, for the sculptures told us exactly
what the buildings and mountains and squares and suburbs and landscape setting
and luxuriant Tertiary vegetation had looked like. It must have had a
marvellous and mystic beauty, and as I thought of it I almost forgot the clammy
sense of sinister oppression with which the city’s inhuman age and massiveness
and deadness and remoteness and glacial twilight had choked and weighed on my
spirit. Yet according to certain carvings the denizens of that city had
themselves known the clutch of oppressive terror; for there was a sombre and
recurrent type of scene in which the Old Ones were shewn in the act of
recoiling affrightedly from some object—never allowed to appear in the
design—found in the great river and indicated as having been washed down
through waving, vine-draped cycad-forests from those horrible westward
mountains.
It was only in the one late-built house with the decadent carvings that we
obtained any foreshadowing of the final calamity leading to the city’s
desertion. Undoubtedly there must have been many sculptures of the same age
elsewhere, even allowing for the slackened energies and aspirations of a
stressful and uncertain period; indeed, very certain evidence of the existence
of others came to us shortly afterward. But this was the first and only set we
directly encountered. We meant to look farther later on; but as I have said,
immediate conditions dictated another present objective. There would, though,
have been a limit—for after all hope of a long future occupancy of the place
had perished among the Old Ones, there could not but have been a complete
cessation of mural decoration. The ultimate blow, of course, was the coming of
the great cold which once held most of the earth in thrall, and which has never
departed from the ill-fated poles—the great cold that, at the world’s other
extremity, put an end to the fabled lands of Lomar and Hyperborea.
Just when this tendency began in the antarctic it would be hard to say in terms
of exact years. Nowadays we set the beginning of the general glacial periods at
a distance of about 500,000 years from the present, but at the poles the
terrible scourge must have commenced much earlier. All quantitative estimates
are partly guesswork; but it is quite likely that the decadent sculptures were
made considerably less than a million years ago, and that the actual desertion
of the city was complete long before the conventional opening of the
Pleistocene—500,000 years ago—as reckoned in terms of the earth’s whole
surface.
In the decadent sculptures there were signs of thinner vegetation everywhere,
and of a decreased country life on the part of the Old Ones. Heating devices
were shewn in the houses, and winter travellers were represented as muffled in
protective fabrics. Then we saw a series of cartouches (the continuous band
arrangement being frequently interrupted in these late carvings) depicting a
constantly growing migration to the nearest refuges of greater warmth—some
fleeing to cities under the sea off the far-away coast, and some clambering
down through networks of limestone caverns in the hollow hills to the
neighbouring black abyss of subterrene waters.
In the end it seems to have been the neighbouring abyss which received the
greatest colonisation. This was partly due, no doubt, to the traditional
sacredness of this especial region; but may have been more conclusively
determined by the opportunities it gave for continuing the use of the great
temples on the honeycombed mountains, and for retaining the vast land city as a
place of summer residence and base of communication with various mines. The
linkage of old and new abodes was made more effective by means of several
gradings and improvements along the connecting routes, including the chiselling
of numerous direct tunnels from the ancient metropolis to the black
abyss—sharply down-pointing tunnels whose mouths we carefully drew, according
to our most thoughtful estimates, on the guide map we were compiling. It was
obvious that at least two of these tunnels lay within a reasonable exploring
distance of where we were; both being on the mountainward edge of the city, one
less than a quarter-mile toward the ancient river-course, and the other perhaps
twice that distance in the opposite direction.
The abyss, it seems, had shelving shores of dry land at certain places; but the
Old Ones built their new city under water—no doubt because of its greater
certainty of uniform warmth. The depth of the hidden sea appears to have been
very great, so that the earth’s internal heat could ensure its habitability for
an indefinite period. The beings seem to have had no trouble in adapting
themselves to part-time—and eventually, of course, whole-time—residence under
water; since they had never allowed their gill systems to atrophy. There were
many sculptures which shewed how they had always frequently visited their
submarine kinsfolk elsewhere, and how they had habitually bathed on the deep
bottom of their great river. The darkness of inner earth could likewise have
been no deterrent to a race accustomed to long antarctic nights.
Decadent though their style undoubtedly was, these latest carvings had a truly
epic quality where they told of the building of the new city in the cavern sea.
The Old Ones had gone about it scientifically; quarrying insoluble rocks from
the heart of the honeycombed mountains, and employing expert workers from the
nearest submarine city to perform the construction according to the best
methods. These workers brought with them all that was necessary to establish
the new venture—shoggoth-tissue from which to breed stone-lifters and
subsequent beasts of burden for the cavern city, and other protoplasmic matter
to mould into phosphorescent organisms for lighting purposes.
At last a mighty metropolis rose on the bottom of that Stygian sea; its
architecture much like that of the city above, and its workmanship displaying
relatively little decadence because of the precise mathematical element
inherent in building operations. The newly bred shoggoths grew to enormous size
and singular intelligence, and were represented as taking and executing orders
with marvellous quickness. They seemed to converse with the Old Ones by
mimicking their voices—a sort of musical piping over a wide range, if poor
Lake’s dissection had indicated aright—and to work more from spoken commands
than from hypnotic suggestions as in earlier times. They were, however, kept in
admirable control. The phosphorescent organisms supplied light with vast
effectiveness, and doubtless atoned for the loss of the familiar polar auroras
of the outer-world night.
Art and decoration were pursued, though of course with a certain decadence. The
Old Ones seemed to realise this falling off themselves; and in many cases
anticipated the policy of Constantine the Great by transplanting especially
fine blocks of ancient carving from their land city, just as the emperor, in a
similar age of decline, stripped Greece and Asia of their finest art to give
his new Byzantine capital greater splendours than its own people could create.
That the transfer of sculptured blocks had not been more extensive, was
doubtless owing to the fact that the land city was not at first wholly
abandoned. By the time total abandonment did occur—and it surely must have
occurred before the polar Pleistocene was far advanced—the Old Ones had perhaps
become satisfied with their decadent art—or had ceased to recognise the
superior merit of the older carvings. At any rate, the aeon-silent ruins around
us had certainly undergone no wholesale sculptural denudation; though all the
best separate statues, like other moveables, had been taken away.
The decadent cartouches and dadoes telling this story were, as I have said, the
latest we could find in our limited search. They left us with a picture of the
Old Ones shuttling back and forth betwixt the land city in summer and the
sea-cavern city in winter, and sometimes trading with the sea-bottom cities off
the antarctic coast. By this time the ultimate doom of the land city must have
been recognised, for the sculptures shewed many signs of the cold’s malign
encroachments. Vegetation was declining, and the terrible snows of the winter
no longer melted completely even in midsummer. The saurian livestock were
nearly all dead, and the mammals were standing it none too well. To keep on
with the work of the upper world it had become necessary to adapt some of the
amorphous and curiously cold-resistant shoggoths to land life; a thing the Old
Ones had formerly been reluctant to do. The great river was now lifeless, and
the upper sea had lost most of its denizens except the seals and whales. All
the birds had flown away, save only the great, grotesque penguins.
What had happened afterward we could only guess. How long had the new
sea-cavern city survived? Was it still down there, a stony corpse in eternal
blackness? Had the subterranean waters frozen at last? To what fate had the
ocean-bottom cities of the outer world been delivered? Had any of the Old Ones
shifted north ahead of the creeping ice-cap? Existing geology shews no trace of
their presence. Had the frightful Mi-Go been still a menace in the outer land
world of the north? Could one be sure of what might or might not linger even to
this day in the lightless and unplumbed abysses of earth’s deepest waters?
Those things had seemingly been able to withstand any amount of pressure—and
men of the sea have fished up curious objects at times. And has the
killer-whale theory really explained the savage and mysterious scars on
antarctic seals noticed a generation ago by Borchgrevingk?
The specimens found by poor Lake did not enter into these guesses, for their
geologic setting proved them to have lived at what must have been a very early
date in the land city’s history. They were, according to their location,
certainly not less than thirty million years old; and we reflected that in
their day the sea-cavern city, and indeed the cavern itself, had no existence.
They would have remembered an older scene, with lush Tertiary vegetation
everywhere, a younger land city of flourishing arts around them, and a great
river sweeping northward along the base of the mighty mountains toward a
far-away tropic ocean.
And yet we could not help thinking about these specimens—especially about the
eight perfect ones that were missing from Lake’s hideously ravaged camp. There
was something abnormal about that whole business—the strange things we had
tried so hard to lay to somebody’s madness—those frightful graves—the amount
and nature of the missing material—Gedney—the unearthly toughness of those
archaic monstrosities, and the queer vital freaks the sculptures now shewed the
race to have. . . . Danforth and I had seen a good deal in the last few hours,
and were prepared to believe and keep silent about many appalling and
incredible secrets of primal Nature.

IX.

I have said that our study of the decadent sculptures brought about a change in
our immediate objective. This of course had to do with the chiselled avenues to
the black inner world, of whose existence we had not known before, but which we
were now eager to find and traverse. From the evident scale of the carvings we
deduced that a steeply descending walk of about a mile through either of the
neighbouring tunnels would bring us to the brink of the dizzy sunless cliffs
above the great abyss; down whose side adequate paths, improved by the Old
Ones, led to the rocky shore of the hidden and nighted ocean. To behold this
fabulous gulf in stark reality was a lure which seemed impossible of resistance
once we knew of the thing—yet we realised we must begin the quest at once if we
expected to include it on our present flight.
It was now 8 P.M., and we had not enough battery replacements to let our
torches burn on forever. We had done so much of our studying and copying below
the glacial level that our battery supply had had at least five hours of nearly
continuous use; and despite the special dry cell formula would obviously be
good for only about four more—though by keeping one torch unused, except for
especially interesting or difficult places, we might manage to eke out a safe
margin beyond that. It would not do to be without a light in these Cyclopean
catacombs, hence in order to make the abyss trip we must give up all further
mural deciphering. Of course we intended to revisit the place for days and
perhaps weeks of intensive study and photography—curiosity having long ago got
the better of horror—but just now we must hasten. Our supply of trail-blazing
paper was far from unlimited, and we were reluctant to sacrifice spare
notebooks or sketching paper to augment it; but we did let one large notebook
go. If worst came to worst, we could resort to rock-chipping—and of course it
would be possible, even in case of really lost direction, to work up to full
daylight by one channel or another if granted sufficient time for plentiful
trial and error. So at last we set off eagerly in the indicated direction of
the nearest tunnel.
According to the carvings from which we had made our map, the desired
tunnel-mouth could not be much more than a quarter-mile from where we stood;
the intervening space shewing solid-looking buildings quite likely to be
penetrable still at a sub-glacial level. The opening itself would be in the
basement—on the angle nearest the foothills—of a vast five-pointed structure of
evidently public and perhaps ceremonial nature, which we tried to identify from
our aërial survey of the ruins. No such structure came to our minds as we
recalled our flight, hence we concluded that its upper parts had been greatly
damaged, or that it had been totally shattered in an ice-rift we had noticed.
In the latter case the tunnel would probably turn out to be choked, so that we
would have to try the next nearest one—the one less than a mile to the north.
The intervening river-course prevented our trying any of the more southerly
tunnels on this trip; and indeed, if both of the neighbouring ones were choked
it was doubtful whether our batteries would warrant an attempt on the next
northerly one—about a mile beyond our second choice.
As we threaded our dim way through the labyrinth with the aid of map and
compass—traversing rooms and corridors in every stage of ruin or preservation,
clambering up ramps, crossing upper floors and bridges and clambering down
again, encountering choked doorways and piles of debris, hastening now and then
along finely preserved and uncannily immaculate stretches, taking false leads
and retracing our way (in such cases removing the blind paper trail we had
left), and once in a while striking the bottom of an open shaft through which
daylight poured or trickled down—we were repeatedly tantalised by the
sculptured walls along our route. Many must have told tales of immense
historical importance, and only the prospect of later visits reconciled us to
the need of passing them by. As it was, we slowed down once in a while and
turned on our second torch. If we had had more films we would certainly have
paused briefly to photograph certain bas-reliefs, but time-consuming hand
copying was clearly out of the question.
I come now once more to a place where the temptation to hesitate, or to hint
rather than state, is very strong. It is necessary, however, to reveal the rest
in order to justify my course in discouraging further exploration. We had
wormed our way very close to the computed site of the tunnel’s mouth—having
crossed a second-story bridge to what seemed plainly the tip of a pointed wall,
and descended to a ruinous corridor especially rich in decadently elaborate and
apparently ritualistic sculptures of late workmanship—when, about 8:30 P.M.,
Danforth’s keen young nostrils gave us the first hint of something unusual. If
we had had a dog with us, I suppose we would have been warned before. At first
we could not precisely say what was wrong with the formerly crystal-pure air,
but after a few seconds our memories reacted only too definitely. Let me try to
state the thing without flinching. There was an odour—and that odour was
vaguely, subtly, and unmistakably akin to what had nauseated us upon opening
the insane grave of the horror poor Lake had dissected.
Of course the revelation was not as clearly cut at the time as it sounds now.
There were several conceivable explanations, and we did a good deal of
indecisive whispering. Most important of all, we did not retreat without
further investigation; for having come this far, we were loath to be balked by
anything short of certain disaster. Anyway, what we must have suspected was
altogether too wild to believe. Such things did not happen in any normal world.
It was probably sheer irrational instinct which made us dim our single
torch—tempted no longer by the decadent and sinister sculptures that leered
menacingly from the oppressive walls—and which softened our progress to a
cautious tiptoeing and crawling over the increasingly littered floor and heaps
of debris.
Danforth’s eyes as well as nose proved better than mine, for it was likewise he
who first noticed the queer aspect of the debris after we had passed many
half-choked arches leading to chambers and corridors on the ground level. It
did not look quite as it ought after countless thousands of years of desertion,
and when we cautiously turned on more light we saw that a kind of swath seemed
to have been lately tracked through it. The irregular nature of the litter
precluded any definite marks, but in the smoother places there were suggestions
of the dragging of heavy objects. Once we thought there was a hint of parallel
tracks, as if of runners. This was what made us pause again.
It was during that pause that we caught—simultaneously this time—the other
odour ahead. Paradoxically, it was both a less frightful and a more frightful
odour—less frightful intrinsically, but infinitely appalling in this place
under the known circumstances . . . unless, of course, Gedney. . . . For the
odour was the plain and familiar one of common petrol—every-day gasoline.
Our motivation after that is something I will leave to psychologists. We knew
now that some terrible extension of the camp horrors must have crawled into
this nighted burial-place of the aeons, hence could not doubt any longer the
existence of nameless conditions—present or at least recent—just ahead. Yet in
the end we did let sheer burning curiosity—or anxiety—or auto-hypnotism—or
vague thoughts of responsibility toward Gedney—or what not—drive us on.
Danforth whispered again of the print he thought he had seen at the
alley-turning in the ruins above; and of the faint musical piping—potentially
of tremendous significance in the light of Lake’s dissection report despite its
close resemblance to the cave-mouth echoes of the windy peaks—which he thought
he had shortly afterward half heard from unknown depths below. I, in my turn,
whispered of how the camp was left—of what had disappeared, and of how the
madness of a lone survivor might have conceived the inconceivable—a wild trip
across the monstrous mountains and a descent into the unknown primal masonry—
But we could not convince each other, or even ourselves, of anything definite.
We had turned off all light as we stood still, and vaguely noticed that a trace
of deeply filtered upper day kept the blackness from being absolute. Having
automatically begun to move ahead, we guided ourselves by occasional flashes
from our torch. The disturbed debris formed an impression we could not shake
off, and the smell of gasoline grew stronger. More and more ruin met our eyes
and hampered our feet, until very soon we saw that the forward way was about to
cease. We had been all too correct in our pessimistic guess about that rift
glimpsed from the air. Our tunnel quest was a blind one, and we were not even
going to be able to reach the basement out of which the abyssward aperture
opened.
The torch, flashing over the grotesquely carven walls of the blocked corridor
in which we stood, shewed several doorways in various states of obstruction;
and from one of them the gasoline odour—quite submerging that other hint of
odour—came with especial distinctness. As we looked more steadily, we saw that
beyond a doubt there had been a slight and recent clearing away of debris from
that particular opening. Whatever the lurking horror might be, we believed the
direct avenue toward it was now plainly manifest. I do not think anyone will
wonder that we waited an appreciable time before making any further motion.
And yet, when we did venture inside that black arch, our first impression was
one of anticlimax. For amidst the littered expanse of that sculptured crypt—a
perfect cube with sides of about twenty feet—there remained no recent object of
instantly discernible size; so that we looked instinctively, though in vain,
for a farther doorway. In another moment, however, Danforth’s sharp vision had
descried a place where the floor debris had been disturbed; and we turned on
both torches full strength. Though what we saw in that light was actually
simple and trifling, I am none the less reluctant to tell of it because of what
it implied. It was a rough levelling of the debris, upon which several small
objects lay carelessly scattered, and at one corner of which a considerable
amount of gasoline must have been spilled lately enough to leave a strong odour
even at this extreme super-plateau altitude. In other words, it could not be
other than a sort of camp—a camp made by questing beings who like us had been
turned back by the unexpectedly choked way to the abyss.
Let me be plain. The scattered objects were, so far as substance was concerned,
all from Lake’s camp; and consisted of tin cans as queerly opened as those we
had seen at that ravaged place, many spent matches, three illustrated books
more or less curiously smudged, an empty ink bottle with its pictorial and
instructional carton, a broken fountain pen, some oddly snipped fragments of
fur and tent-cloth, a used electric battery with circular of directions, a
folder that came with our type of tent heater, and a sprinkling of crumpled
papers. It was all bad enough, but when we smoothed out the papers and looked
at what was on them we felt we had come to the worst. We had found certain
inexplicably blotted papers at the camp which might have prepared us, yet the
effect of the sight down there in the pre-human vaults of a nightmare city was
almost too much to bear.
A mad Gedney might have made the groups of dots in imitation of those found on
the greenish soapstones, just as the dots on those insane five-pointed
grave-mounds might have been made; and he might conceivably have prepared
rough, hasty sketches—varying in their accuracy or lack of it—which outlined
the neighbouring parts of the city and traced the way from a circularly
represented place outside our previous route—a place we identified as a great
cylindrical tower in the carvings and as a vast circular gulf glimpsed in our
aërial survey—to the present five-pointed structure and the tunnel-mouth
therein. He might, I repeat, have prepared such sketches; for those before us
were quite obviously compiled as our own had been from late sculptures
somewhere in the glacial labyrinth, though not from the ones which we had seen
and used. But what this art-blind bungler could never have done was to execute
those sketches in a strange and assured technique perhaps superior, despite
haste and carelessness, to any of the decadent carvings from which they were
taken—the characteristic and unmistakable technique of the Old Ones themselves
in the dead city’s heyday.
There are those who will say Danforth and I were utterly mad not to flee for
our lives after that; since our conclusions were now—notwithstanding their
wildness—completely fixed, and of a nature I need not even mention to those who
have read my account as far as this. Perhaps we were mad—for have I not said
those horrible peaks were mountains of madness? But I think I can detect
something of the same spirit—albeit in a less extreme form—in the men who stalk
deadly beasts through African jungles to photograph them or study their habits.
Half-paralysed with terror though we were, there was nevertheless fanned within
us a blazing flame of awe and curiosity which triumphed in the end.
Of course we did not mean to face that—or those—which we knew had been there,
but we felt that they must be gone by now. They would by this time have found
the other neighbouring entrance to the abyss, and have passed within to
whatever night-black fragments of the past might await them in the ultimate
gulf—the ultimate gulf they had never seen. Or if that entrance, too, was
blocked, they would have gone on to the north seeking another. They were, we
remembered, partly independent of light.
Looking back to that moment, I can scarcely recall just what precise form our
new emotions took—just what change of immediate objective it was that so
sharpened our sense of expectancy. We certainly did not mean to face what we
feared—yet I will not deny that we may have had a lurking, unconscious wish to
spy certain things from some hidden vantage-point. Probably we had not given up
our zeal to glimpse the abyss itself, though there was interposed a new goal in
the form of that great circular place shewn on the crumpled sketches we had
found. We had at once recognised it as a monstrous cylindrical tower figuring
in the very earliest carvings, but appearing only as a prodigious round
aperture from above. Something about the impressiveness of its rendering, even
in these hasty diagrams, made us think that its sub-glacial levels must still
form a feature of peculiar importance. Perhaps it embodied architectural
marvels as yet unencountered by us. It was certainly of incredible age
according to the sculptures in which it figured—being indeed among the first
things built in the city. Its carvings, if preserved, could not but be highly
significant. Moreover, it might form a good present link with the upper world—a
shorter route than the one we were so carefully blazing, and probably that by
which those others had descended.
At any rate, the thing we did was to study the terrible sketches—which quite
perfectly confirmed our own—and start back over the indicated course to the
circular place; the course which our nameless predecessors must have traversed
twice before us. The other neighbouring gate to the abyss would lie beyond
that. I need not speak of our journey—during which we continued to leave an
economical trail of paper—for it was precisely the same in kind as that by
which we had reached the cul de sac; except that it tended to adhere more
closely to the ground level and even descend to basement corridors. Every now
and then we could trace certain disturbing marks in the debris or litter under
foot; and after we had passed outside the radius of the gasoline scent we were
again faintly conscious—spasmodically—of that more hideous and more persistent
scent. After the way had branched from our former course we sometimes gave the
rays of our single torch a furtive sweep along the walls; noting in almost
every case the well-nigh omnipresent sculptures, which indeed seem to have
formed a main aesthetic outlet for the Old Ones.
About 9:30 P.M., while traversing a vaulted corridor whose increasingly
glaciated floor seemed somewhat below the ground level and whose roof grew
lower as we advanced, we began to see strong daylight ahead and were able to
turn off our torch. It appeared that we were coming to the vast circular place,
and that our distance from the upper air could not be very great. The corridor
ended in an arch surprisingly low for these megalithic ruins, but we could see
much through it even before we emerged. Beyond there stretched a prodigious
round space—fully 200 feet in diameter—strown with debris and containing many
choked archways corresponding to the one we were about to cross. The walls
were—in available spaces—boldly sculptured into a spiral band of heroic
proportions; and displayed, despite the destructive weathering caused by the
openness of the spot, an artistic splendour far beyond anything we had
encountered before. The littered floor was quite heavily glaciated, and we
fancied that the true bottom lay at a considerably lower depth.
But the salient object of the place was the titanic stone ramp which, eluding
the archways by a sharp turn outward into the open floor, wound spirally up the
stupendous cylindrical wall like an inside counterpart of those once climbing
outside the monstrous towers or ziggurats of antique Babylon. Only the rapidity
of our flight, and the perspective which confounded the descent with the
tower’s inner wall, had prevented our noticing this feature from the air, and
thus caused us to seek another avenue to the sub-glacial level. Pabodie might
have been able to tell what sort of engineering held it in place, but Danforth
and I could merely admire and marvel. We could see mighty stone corbels and
pillars here and there, but what we saw seemed inadequate to the function
performed. The thing was excellently preserved up to the present top of the
tower—a highly remarkable circumstance in view of its exposure—and its shelter
had done much to protect the bizarre and disturbing cosmic sculptures on the
walls.
As we stepped out into the awesome half-daylight of this monstrous
cylinder-bottom—fifty million years old, and without doubt the most primally
ancient structure ever to meet our eyes—we saw that the ramp-traversed sides
stretched dizzily up to a height of fully sixty feet. This, we recalled from
our aërial survey, meant an outside glaciation of some forty feet; since the
yawning gulf we had seen from the plane had been at the top of an approximately
twenty-foot mound of crumbled masonry, somewhat sheltered for three-fourths of
its circumference by the massive curving walls of a line of higher ruins.
According to the sculptures the original tower had stood in the centre of an
immense circular plaza; and had been perhaps 500 or 600 feet high, with tiers
of horizontal discs near the top, and a row of needle-like spires along the
upper rim. Most of the masonry had obviously toppled outward rather than
inward—a fortunate happening, since otherwise the ramp might have been
shattered and the whole interior choked. As it was, the ramp shewed sad
battering; whilst the choking was such that all the archways at the bottom
seemed to have been recently half-cleared.
It took us only a moment to conclude that this was indeed the route by which
those others had descended, and that this would be the logical route for our
own ascent despite the long trail of paper we had left elsewhere. The tower’s
mouth was no farther from the foothills and our waiting plane than was the
great terraced building we had entered, and any further sub-glacial exploration
we might make on this trip would lie in this general region. Oddly, we were
still thinking about possible later trips—even after all we had seen and
guessed. Then as we picked our way cautiously over the debris of the great
floor, there came a sight which for the time excluded all other matters.
It was the neatly huddled array of three sledges in that farther angle of the
ramp’s lower and outward-projecting course which had hitherto been screened
from our view. There they were—the three sledges missing from Lake’s
camp—shaken by a hard usage which must have included forcible dragging along
great reaches of snowless masonry and debris, as well as much hand portage over
utterly unnavigable places. They were carefully and intelligently packed and
strapped, and contained things memorably familiar enough—the gasoline stove,
fuel cans, instrument cases, provision tins, tarpaulins obviously bulging with
books, and some bulging with less obvious contents—everything derived from
Lake’s equipment. After what we had found in that other room, we were in a
measure prepared for this encounter. The really great shock came when we
stepped over and undid one tarpaulin whose outlines had peculiarly disquieted
us. It seems that others as well as Lake had been interested in collecting
typical specimens; for there were two here, both stiffly frozen, perfectly
preserved, patched with adhesive plaster where some wounds around the neck had
occurred, and wrapped with patent care to prevent further damage. They were the
bodies of young Gedney and the missing dog.

X.

Many people will probably judge us callous as well as mad for thinking about
the northward tunnel and the abyss so soon after our sombre discovery, and I am
not prepared to say that we would have immediately revived such thoughts but
for a specific circumstance which broke in upon us and set up a whole new train
of speculations. We had replaced the tarpaulin over poor Gedney and were
standing in a kind of mute bewilderment when the sounds finally reached our
consciousness—the first sounds we had heard since descending out of the open
where the mountain wind whined faintly from its unearthly heights. Well known
and mundane though they were, their presence in this remote world of death was
more unexpected and unnerving than any grotesque or fabulous tones could
possibly have been—since they gave a fresh upsetting to all our notions of
cosmic harmony.
Had it been some trace of that bizarre musical piping over a wide range which
Lake’s dissection report had led us to expect in those others—and which,
indeed, our overwrought fancies had been reading into every wind-howl we had
heard since coming on the camp horror—it would have had a kind of hellish
congruity with the aeon-dead region around us. A voice from other epochs
belongs in a graveyard of other epochs. As it was, however, the noise shattered
all our profoundly seated adjustments—all our tacit acceptance of the inner
antarctic as a waste as utterly and irrevocably void of every vestige of normal
life as the sterile disc of the moon. What we heard was not the fabulous note
of any buried blasphemy of elder earth from whose supernal toughness an
age-denied polar sun had evoked a monstrous response. Instead, it was a thing
so mockingly normal and so unerringly familiarised by our sea days off Victoria
Land and our camp days at McMurdo Sound that we shuddered to think of it here,
where such things ought not to be. To be brief—it was simply the raucous
squawking of a penguin.
The muffled sound floated from sub-glacial recesses nearly opposite to the
corridor whence we had come—regions manifestly in the direction of that other
tunnel to the vast abyss. The presence of a living water-bird in such a
direction—in a world whose surface was one of age-long and uniform
lifelessness—could lead to only one conclusion; hence our first thought was to
verify the objective reality of the sound. It was, indeed, repeated; and seemed
at times to come from more than one throat. Seeking its source, we entered an
archway from which much debris had been cleared; resuming our
trail-blazing—with an added paper-supply taken with curious repugnance from one
of the tarpaulin bundles on the sledges—when we left daylight behind.
As the glaciated floor gave place to a litter of detritus, we plainly discerned
some curious dragging tracks; and once Danforth found a distinct print of a
sort whose description would be only too superfluous. The course indicated by
the penguin cries was precisely what our map and compass prescribed as an
approach to the more northerly tunnel-mouth, and we were glad to find that a
bridgeless thoroughfare on the ground and basement levels seemed open. The
tunnel, according to the chart, ought to start from the basement of a large
pyramidal structure which we seemed vaguely to recall from our aërial survey as
remarkably well preserved. Along our path the single torch shewed a customary
profusion of carvings, but we did not pause to examine any of these.
Suddenly a bulky white shape loomed up ahead of us, and we flashed on the
second torch. It is odd how wholly this new quest had turned our minds from
earlier fears of what might lurk near. Those other ones, having left their
supplies in the great circular place, must have planned to return after their
scouting trip toward or into the abyss; yet we had now discarded all caution
concerning them as completely as if they had never existed. This white,
waddling thing was fully six feet high, yet we seemed to realise at once that
it was not one of those others. They were larger and dark, and according to the
sculptures their motion over land surfaces was a swift, assured matter despite
the queerness of their sea-born tentacle equipment. But to say that the white
thing did not profoundly frighten us would be vain. We were indeed clutched for
an instant by a primitive dread almost sharper than the worst of our reasoned
fears regarding those others. Then came a flash of anticlimax as the white
shape sidled into a lateral archway to our left to join two others of its kind
which had summoned it in raucous tones. For it was only a penguin—albeit of a
huge, unknown species larger than the greatest of the known king penguins, and
monstrous in its combined albinism and virtual eyelessness.
When we had followed the thing into the archway and turned both our torches on
the indifferent and unheeding group of three we saw that they were all eyeless
albinos of the same unknown and gigantic species. Their size reminded us of
some of the archaic penguins depicted in the Old Ones’ sculptures, and it did
not take us long to conclude that they were descended from the same
stock—undoubtedly surviving through a retreat to some warmer inner region whose
perpetual blackness had destroyed their pigmentation and atrophied their eyes
to mere useless slits. That their present habitat was the vast abyss we sought,
was not for a moment to be doubted; and this evidence of the gulf’s continued
warmth and habitability filled us with the most curious and subtly perturbing
fancies.
We wondered, too, what had caused these three birds to venture out of their
usual domain. The state and silence of the great dead city made it clear that
it had at no time been an habitual seasonal rookery, whilst the manifest
indifference of the trio to our presence made it seem odd that any passing
party of those others should have startled them. Was it possible that those
others had taken some aggressive action or tried to increase their meat supply?
We doubted whether that pungent odour which the dogs had hated could cause an
equal antipathy in these penguins; since their ancestors had obviously lived on
excellent terms with the Old Ones—an amicable relationship which must have
survived in the abyss below as long as any of the Old Ones remained.
Regretting—in a flareup of the old spirit of pure science—that we could not
photograph these anomalous creatures, we shortly left them to their squawking
and pushed on toward the abyss whose openness was now so positively proved to
us, and whose exact direction occasional penguin tracks made clear.
Not long afterward a steep descent in a long, low, doorless, and peculiarly
sculptureless corridor led us to believe that we were approaching the
tunnel-mouth at last. We had passed two more penguins, and heard others
immediately ahead. Then the corridor ended in a prodigious open space which
made us gasp involuntarily—a perfect inverted hemisphere, obviously deep
underground; fully an hundred feet in diameter and fifty feet high, with low
archways opening around all parts of the circumference but one, and that one
yawning cavernously with a black arched aperture which broke the symmetry of
the vault to a height of nearly fifteen feet. It was the entrance to the great
abyss.
In this vast hemisphere, whose concave roof was impressively though decadently
carved to a likeness of the primordial celestial dome, a few albino penguins
waddled—aliens there, but indifferent and unseeing. The black tunnel yawned
indefinitely off at a steep descending grade, its aperture adorned with
grotesquely chiselled jambs and lintel. From that cryptical mouth we fancied a
current of slightly warmer air and perhaps even a suspicion of vapour
proceeded; and we wondered what living entities other than penguins the
limitless void below, and the contiguous honeycombings of the land and the
titan mountains, might conceal. We wondered, too, whether the trace of
mountain-top smoke at first suspected by poor Lake, as well as the odd haze we
had ourselves perceived around the rampart-crowned peak, might not be caused by
the tortuous-channelled rising of some such vapour from the unfathomed regions
of earth’s core.
Entering the tunnel, we saw that its outline was—at least at the start—about
fifteen feet each way; sides, floor, and arched roof composed of the usual
megalithic masonry. The sides were sparsely decorated with cartouches of
conventional designs in a late, decadent style; and all the construction and
carving were marvellously well preserved. The floor was quite clear, except for
a slight detritus bearing outgoing penguin tracks and the inward tracks of
those others. The farther one advanced, the warmer it became; so that we were
soon unbuttoning our heavy garments. We wondered whether there were any
actually igneous manifestations below, and whether the waters of that sunless
sea were hot. After a short distance the masonry gave place to solid rock,
though the tunnel kept the same proportions and presented the same aspect of
carved regularity. Occasionally its varying grade became so steep that grooves
were cut in the floor. Several times we noted the mouths of small lateral
galleries not recorded in our diagrams; none of them such as to complicate the
problem of our return, and all of them welcome as possible refuges in case we
met unwelcome entities on their way back from the abyss. The nameless scent of
such things was very distinct. Doubtless it was suicidally foolish to venture
into that tunnel under the known conditions, but the lure of the unplumbed is
stronger in certain persons than most suspect—indeed, it was just such a lure
which had brought us to this unearthly polar waste in the first place. We saw
several penguins as we passed along, and speculated on the distance we would
have to traverse. The carvings had led us to expect a steep downhill walk of
about a mile to the abyss, but our previous wanderings had shewn us that
matters of scale were not wholly to be depended on.
After about a quarter of a mile that nameless scent became greatly accentuated,
and we kept very careful track of the various lateral openings we passed. There
was no visible vapour as at the mouth, but this was doubtless due to the lack
of contrasting cooler air. The temperature was rapidly ascending, and we were
not surprised to come upon a careless heap of material shudderingly familiar to
us. It was composed of furs and tent-cloth taken from Lake’s camp, and we did
not pause to study the bizarre forms into which the fabrics had been slashed.
Slightly beyond this point we noticed a decided increase in the size and number
of the side-galleries, and concluded that the densely honeycombed region
beneath the higher foothills must now have been reached. The nameless scent was
now curiously mixed with another and scarcely less offensive odour—of what
nature we could not guess, though we thought of decaying organisms and perhaps
unknown subterrene fungi. Then came a startling expansion of the tunnel for
which the carvings had not prepared us—a broadening and rising into a lofty,
natural-looking elliptical cavern with a level floor; some 75 feet long and 50
broad, and with many immense side-passages leading away into cryptical
darkness.
Though this cavern was natural in appearance, an inspection with both torches
suggested that it had been formed by the artificial destruction of several
walls between adjacent honeycombings. The walls were rough, and the high
vaulted roof was thick with stalactites; but the solid rock floor had been
smoothed off, and was free from all debris, detritus, or even dust to a
positively abnormal extent. Except for the avenue through which we had come,
this was true of the floors of all the great galleries opening off from it; and
the singularity of the condition was such as to set us vainly puzzling. The
curious new foetor which had supplemented the nameless scent was excessively
pungent here; so much so that it destroyed all trace of the other. Something
about this whole place, with its polished and almost glistening floor, struck
us as more vaguely baffling and horrible than any of the monstrous things we
had previously encountered.
The regularity of the passage immediately ahead, as well as the larger
proportion of penguin-droppings there, prevented all confusion as to the right
course amidst this plethora of equally great cave-mouths. Nevertheless we
resolved to resume our paper trail-blazing if any further complexity should
develop; for dust tracks, of course, could no longer be expected. Upon resuming
our direct progress we cast a beam of torchlight over the tunnel walls—and
stopped short in amazement at the supremely radical change which had come over
the carvings in this part of the passage. We realised, of course, the great
decadence of the Old Ones’ sculpture at the time of the tunnelling; and had
indeed noticed the inferior workmanship of the arabesques in the stretches
behind us. But now, in this deeper section beyond the cavern, there was a
sudden difference wholly transcending explanation—a difference in basic nature
as well as in mere quality, and involving so profound and calamitous a
degradation of skill that nothing in the hitherto observed rate of decline
could have led one to expect it.
This new and degenerate work was coarse, bold, and wholly lacking in delicacy
of detail. It was counter-sunk with exaggerated depth in bands following the
same general line as the sparse cartouches of the earlier sections, but the
height of the reliefs did not reach the level of the general surface. Danforth
had the idea that it was a second carving—a sort of palimpsest formed after the
obliteration of a previous design. In nature it was wholly decorative and
conventional; and consisted of crude spirals and angles roughly following the
quintile mathematical tradition of the Old Ones, yet seeming more like a parody
than a perpetuation of that tradition. We could not get it out of our minds
that some subtly but profoundly alien element had been added to the aesthetic
feeling behind the technique—an alien element, Danforth guessed, that was
responsible for the manifestly laborious substitution. It was like, yet
disturbingly unlike, what we had come to recognise as the Old Ones’ art; and I
was persistently reminded of such hybrid things as the ungainly Palmyrene
sculptures fashioned in the Roman manner. That others had recently noticed this
belt of carving was hinted by the presence of a used torch battery on the floor
in front of one of the most characteristic designs.
Since we could not afford to spend any considerable time in study, we resumed
our advance after a cursory look; though frequently casting beams over the
walls to see if any further decorative changes developed. Nothing of the sort
was perceived, though the carvings were in places rather sparse because of the
numerous mouths of smooth-floored lateral tunnels. We saw and heard fewer
penguins, but thought we caught a vague suspicion of an infinitely distant
chorus of them somewhere deep within the earth. The new and inexplicable odour
was abominably strong, and we could detect scarcely a sign of that other
nameless scent. Puffs of visible vapour ahead bespoke increasing contrasts in
temperature, and the relative nearness of the sunless sea-cliffs of the great
abyss. Then, quite unexpectedly, we saw certain obstructions on the polished
floor ahead—obstructions which were quite definitely not penguins—and turned on
our second torch after making sure that the objects were quite stationary.

XI.

Still another time have I come to a place where it is very difficult to
proceed. I ought to be hardened by this stage; but there are some experiences
and intimations which scar too deeply to permit of healing, and leave only such
an added sensitiveness that memory reinspires all the original horror. We saw,
as I have said, certain obstructions on the polished floor ahead; and I may add
that our nostrils were assailed almost simultaneously by a very curious
intensification of the strange prevailing foetor, now quite plainly mixed with
the nameless stench of those others which had gone before us. The light of the
second torch left no doubt of what the obstructions were, and we dared approach
them only because we could see, even from a distance, that they were quite as
past all harming power as had been the six similar specimens unearthed from the
monstrous star-mounded graves at poor Lake’s camp.
They were, indeed, as lacking in completeness as most of those we had
unearthed—though it grew plain from the thick, dark-green pool gathering around
them that their incompleteness was of infinitely greater recency. There seemed
to be only four of them, whereas Lake’s bulletins would have suggested no less
than eight as forming the group which had preceded us. To find them in this
state was wholly unexpected, and we wondered what sort of monstrous struggle
had occurred down here in the dark.
Penguins, attacked in a body, retaliate savagely with their beaks; and our ears
now made certain the existence of a rookery far beyond. Had those others
disturbed such a place and aroused murderous pursuit? The obstructions did not
suggest it, for penguin beaks against the tough tissues Lake had dissected
could hardly account for the terrible damage our approaching glance was
beginning to make out. Besides, the huge blind birds we had seen appeared to be
singularly peaceful.
Had there, then, been a struggle among those others, and were the absent four
responsible? If so, where were they? Were they close at hand and likely to form
an immediate menace to us? We glanced anxiously at some of the smooth-floored
lateral passages as we continued our slow and frankly reluctant approach.
Whatever the conflict was, it had clearly been that which had frightened the
penguins into their unaccustomed wandering. It must, then, have arisen near
that faintly heard rookery in the incalculable gulf beyond, since there were no
signs that any birds had normally dwelt here. Perhaps, we reflected, there had
been a hideous running fight, with the weaker party seeking to get back to the
cached sledges when their pursuers finished them. One could picture the
daemoniac fray between namelessly monstrous entities as it surged out of the
black abyss with great clouds of frantic penguins squawking and scurrying
ahead.
I say that we approached those sprawling and incomplete obstructions slowly and
reluctantly. Would to heaven we had never approached them at all, but had run
back at top speed out of that blasphemous tunnel with the greasily smooth
floors and the degenerate murals aping and mocking the things they had
superseded—run back, before we had seen what we did see, and before our minds
were burned with something which will never let us breathe easily again!
Both of our torches were turned on the prostrate objects, so that we soon
realised the dominant factor in their incompleteness. Mauled, compressed,
twisted, and ruptured as they were, their chief common injury was total
decapitation. From each one the tentacled starfish-head had been removed; and
as we drew near we saw that the manner of removal looked more like some hellish
tearing or suction than like any ordinary form of cleavage. Their noisome
dark-green ichor formed a large, spreading pool; but its stench was half
overshadowed by that newer and stranger stench, here more pungent than at any
other point along our route. Only when we had come very close to the sprawling
obstructions could we trace that second, unexplainable foetor to any immediate
source—and the instant we did so Danforth, remembering certain very vivid
sculptures of the Old Ones’ history in the Permian age 150 million years ago,
gave vent to a nerve-tortured cry which echoed hysterically through that
vaulted and archaic passage with the evil palimpsest carvings.
I came only just short of echoing his cry myself; for I had seen those primal
sculptures, too, and had shudderingly admired the way the nameless artist had
suggested that hideous slime-coating found on certain incomplete and prostrate
Old Ones—those whom the frightful shoggoths had characteristically slain and
sucked to a ghastly headlessness in the great war of re-subjugation. They were
infamous, nightmare sculptures even when telling of age-old, bygone things; for
shoggoths and their work ought not to be seen by human beings or portrayed by
any beings. The mad author of the Necronomicon had nervously tried to swear
that none had been bred on this planet, and that only drugged dreamers had ever
conceived them. Formless protoplasm able to mock and reflect all forms and
organs and processes—viscous agglutinations of bubbling cells—rubbery
fifteen-foot spheroids infinitely plastic and ductile—slaves of suggestion,
builders of cities—more and more sullen, more and more intelligent, more and
more amphibious, more and more imitative—Great God! What madness made even
those blasphemous Old Ones willing to use and to carve such things?
And now, when Danforth and I saw the freshly glistening and reflectively
iridescent black slime which clung thickly to those headless bodies and stank
obscenely with that new unknown odour whose cause only a diseased fancy could
envisage—clung to those bodies and sparkled less voluminously on a smooth part
of the accursedly re-sculptured wall in a series of grouped dots—we understood
the quality of cosmic fear to its uttermost depths. It was not fear of those
four missing others—for all too well did we suspect they would do no harm
again. Poor devils! After all, they were not evil things of their kind. They
were the men of another age and another order of being. Nature had played a
hellish jest on them—as it will on any others that human madness, callousness,
or cruelty may hereafter drag up in that hideously dead or sleeping polar
waste—and this was their tragic homecoming.
They had not been even savages—for what indeed had they done? That awful
awakening in the cold of an unknown epoch—perhaps an attack by the furry,
frantically barking quadrupeds, and a dazed defence against them and the
equally frantic white simians with the queer wrappings and paraphernalia . . .
poor Lake, poor Gedney . . . and poor Old Ones! Scientists to the last—what had
they done that we would not have done in their place? God, what intelligence
and persistence! What a facing of the incredible, just as those carven kinsmen
and forbears had faced things only a little less incredible! Radiates,
vegetables, monstrosities, star-spawn—whatever they had been, they were men!
They had crossed the icy peaks on whose templed slopes they had once worshipped
and roamed among the tree-ferns. They had found their dead city brooding under
its curse, and had read its carven latter days as we had done. They had tried
to reach their living fellows in fabled depths of blackness they had never
seen—and what had they found? All this flashed in unison through the thoughts
of Danforth and me as we looked from those headless, slime-coated shapes to the
loathsome palimpsest sculptures and the diabolical dot-groups of fresh slime on
the wall beside them—looked and understood what must have triumphed and
survived down there in the Cyclopean water-city of that nighted,
penguin-fringed abyss, whence even now a sinister curling mist had begun to
belch pallidly as if in answer to Danforth’s hysterical scream.
The shock of recognising that monstrous slime and headlessness had frozen us
into mute, motionless statues, and it is only through later conversations that
we have learned of the complete identity of our thoughts at that moment. It
seemed aeons that we stood there, but actually it could not have been more than
ten or fifteen seconds. That hateful, pallid mist curled forward as if
veritably driven by some remoter advancing bulk—and then came a sound which
upset much of what we had just decided, and in so doing broke the spell and
enabled us to run like mad past squawking, confused penguins over our former
trail back to the city, along ice-sunken megalithic corridors to the great open
circle, and up that archaic spiral ramp in a frenzied automatic plunge for the
sane outer air and light of day.
The new sound, as I have intimated, upset much that we had decided; because it
was what poor Lake’s dissection had led us to attribute to those we had just
judged dead. It was, Danforth later told me, precisely what he had caught in
infinitely muffled form when at that spot beyond the alley-corner above the
glacial level; and it certainly had a shocking resemblance to the wind-pipings
we had both heard around the lofty mountain caves. At the risk of seeming
puerile I will add another thing, too; if only because of the surprising way
Danforth’s impression chimed with mine. Of course common reading is what
prepared us both to make the interpretation, though Danforth has hinted at
queer notions about unsuspected and forbidden sources to which Poe may have had
access when writing his Arthur Gordon Pym a century ago. It will be remembered
that in that fantastic tale there is a word of unknown but terrible and
prodigious significance connected with the antarctic and screamed eternally by
the gigantic, spectrally snowy birds of that malign region’s core. “Tekeli-li!
Tekeli-li!” That, I may admit, is exactly what we thought we heard conveyed by
that sudden sound behind the advancing white mist—that insidious musical piping
over a singularly wide range.
We were in full flight before three notes or syllables had been uttered, though
we knew that the swiftness of the Old Ones would enable any scream-roused and
pursuing survivor of the slaughter to overtake us in a moment if it really
wished to do so. We had a vague hope, however, that non-aggressive conduct and
a display of kindred reason might cause such a being to spare us in case of
capture; if only from scientific curiosity. After all, if such an one had
nothing to fear for itself it would have no motive in harming us. Concealment
being futile at this juncture, we used our torch for a running glance behind,
and perceived that the mist was thinning. Would we see, at last, a complete and
living specimen of those others? Again came that insidious musical
piping—“Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!”
Then, noting that we were actually gaining on our pursuer, it occurred to us
that the entity might be wounded. We could take no chances, however, since it
was very obviously approaching in answer to Danforth’s scream rather than in
flight from any other entity. The timing was too close to admit of doubt. Of
the whereabouts of that less conceivable and less mentionable nightmare—that
foetid, unglimpsed mountain of slime-spewing protoplasm whose race had
conquered the abyss and sent land pioneers to re-carve and squirm through the
burrows of the hills—we could form no guess; and it cost us a genuine pang to
leave this probably crippled Old One—perhaps a lone survivor—to the peril of
recapture and a nameless fate.
Thank heaven we did not slacken our run. The curling mist had thickened again,
and was driving ahead with increased speed; whilst the straying penguins in our
rear were squawking and screaming and displaying signs of a panic really
surprising in view of their relatively minor confusion when we had passed them.
Once more came that sinister, wide-ranged piping—“Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!” We had
been wrong. The thing was not wounded, but had merely paused on encountering
the bodies of its fallen kindred and the hellish slime inscription above them.
We could never know what that daemon message was—but those burials at Lake’s
camp had shewn how much importance the beings attached to their dead. Our
recklessly used torch now revealed ahead of us the large open cavern where
various ways converged, and we were glad to be leaving those morbid palimpsest
sculptures—almost felt even when scarcely seen—behind.
Another thought which the advent of the cave inspired was the possibility of
losing our pursuer at this bewildering focus of large galleries. There were
several of the blind albino penguins in the open space, and it seemed clear
that their fear of the oncoming entity was extreme to the point of
unaccountability. If at that point we dimmed our torch to the very lowest limit
of travelling need, keeping it strictly in front of us, the frightened
squawking motions of the huge birds in the mist might muffle our footfalls,
screen our true course, and somehow set up a false lead. Amidst the churning,
spiralling fog the littered and unglistening floor of the main tunnel beyond
this point, as differing from the other morbidly polished burrows, could hardly
form a highly distinguishing feature; even, so far as we could conjecture, for
those indicated special senses which made the Old Ones partly though
imperfectly independent of light in emergencies. In fact, we were somewhat
apprehensive lest we go astray ourselves in our haste. For we had, of course,
decided to keep straight on toward the dead city; since the consequences of
loss in those unknown foothill honeycombings would be unthinkable.
The fact that we survived and emerged is sufficient proof that the thing did
take a wrong gallery whilst we providentially hit on the right one. The
penguins alone could not have saved us, but in conjunction with the mist they
seem to have done so. Only a benign fate kept the curling vapours thick enough
at the right moment, for they were constantly shifting and threatening to
vanish. Indeed, they did lift for a second just before we emerged from the
nauseously re-sculptured tunnel into the cave; so that we actually caught one
first and only half-glimpse of the oncoming entity as we cast a final,
desperately fearful glance backward before dimming the torch and mixing with
the penguins in the hope of dodging pursuit. If the fate which screened us was
benign, that which gave us the half-glimpse was infinitely the opposite; for to
that flash of semi-vision can be traced a full half of the horror which has
ever since haunted us.
Our exact motive in looking back again was perhaps no more than the immemorial
instinct of the pursued to gauge the nature and course of its pursuer; or
perhaps it was an automatic attempt to answer a subconscious question raised by
one of our senses. In the midst of our flight, with all our faculties centred
on the problem of escape, we were in no condition to observe and analyse
details; yet even so our latent brain-cells must have wondered at the message
brought them by our nostrils. Afterward we realised what it was—that our
retreat from the foetid slime-coating on those headless obstructions, and the
coincident approach of the pursuing entity, had not brought us the exchange of
stenches which logic called for. In the neighbourhood of the prostrate things
that new and lately unexplainable foetor had been wholly dominant; but by this
time it ought to have largely given place to the nameless stench associated
with those others. This it had not done—for instead, the newer and less
bearable smell was now virtually undiluted, and growing more and more
poisonously insistent each second.
So we glanced back—simultaneously, it would appear; though no doubt the
incipient motion of one prompted the imitation of the other. As we did so we
flashed both torches full strength at the momentarily thinned mist; either from
sheer primitive anxiety to see all we could, or in a less primitive but equally
unconscious effort to dazzle the entity before we dimmed our light and dodged
among the penguins of the labyrinth-centre ahead. Unhappy act! Not Orpheus
himself, or Lot’s wife, paid much more dearly for a backward glance. And again
came that shocking, wide-ranged piping—“Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!”
I might as well be frank—even if I cannot bear to be quite direct—in stating
what we saw; though at the time we felt that it was not to be admitted even to
each other. The words reaching the reader can never even suggest the awfulness
of the sight itself. It crippled our consciousness so completely that I wonder
we had the residual sense to dim our torches as planned, and to strike the
right tunnel toward the dead city. Instinct alone must have carried us
through—perhaps better than reason could have done; though if that was what
saved us, we paid a high price. Of reason we certainly had little enough left.
Danforth was totally unstrung, and the first thing I remember of the rest of
the journey was hearing him light-headedly chant an hysterical formula in which
I alone of mankind could have found anything but insane irrelevance. It
reverberated in falsetto echoes among the squawks of the penguins; reverberated
through the vaultings ahead, and—thank God—through the now empty vaultings
behind. He could not have begun it at once—else we would not have been alive
and blindly racing. I shudder to think of what a shade of difference in his
nervous reactions might have brought.
“South Station Under—Washington Under—Park Street
Under—Kendall—Central—Harvard. . . .” The poor fellow was chanting the familiar
stations of the Boston-Cambridge tunnel that burrowed through our peaceful
native soil thousands of miles away in New England, yet to me the ritual had
neither irrelevance nor home-feeling. It had only horror, because I knew
unerringly the monstrous, nefandous analogy that had suggested it. We had
expected, upon looking back, to see a terrible and incredibly moving entity if
the mists were thin enough; but of that entity we had formed a clear idea. What
we did see—for the mists were indeed all too malignly thinned—was something
altogether different, and immeasurably more hideous and detestable. It was the
utter, objective embodiment of the fantastic novelist’s ‘thing that should not
be’; and its nearest comprehensible analogue is a vast, onrushing subway train
as one sees it from a station platform—the great black front looming colossally
out of infinite subterraneous distance, constellated with strangely coloured
lights and filling the prodigious burrow as a piston fills a cylinder.
But we were not on a station platform. We were on the track ahead as the
nightmare plastic column of foetid black iridescence oozed tightly onward
through its fifteen-foot sinus; gathering unholy speed and driving before it a
spiral, re-thickening cloud of the pallid abyss-vapour. It was a terrible,
indescribable thing vaster than any subway train—a shapeless congeries of
protoplasmic bubbles, faintly self-luminous, and with myriads of temporary eyes
forming and unforming as pustules of greenish light all over the tunnel-filling
front that bore down upon us, crushing the frantic penguins and slithering over
the glistening floor that it and its kind had swept so evilly free of all
litter. Still came that eldritch, mocking cry—“Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!” And at
last we remembered that the daemoniac shoggoths—given life, thought, and
plastic organ patterns solely by the Old Ones, and having no language save that
which the dot-groups expressed—had likewise no voice save the imitated accents
of their bygone masters.

XII.

Danforth and I have recollections of emerging into the great sculptured
hemisphere and of threading our back trail through the Cyclopean rooms and
corridors of the dead city; yet these are purely dream-fragments involving no
memory of volition, details, or physical exertion. It was as if we floated in a
nebulous world or dimension without time, causation, or orientation. The grey
half-daylight of the vast circular space sobered us somewhat; but we did not go
near those cached sledges or look again at poor Gedney and the dog. They have a
strange and titanic mausoleum, and I hope the end of this planet will find them
still undisturbed.
It was while struggling up the colossal spiral incline that we first felt the
terrible fatigue and short breath which our race through the thin plateau air
had produced; but not even the fear of collapse could make us pause before
reaching the normal outer realm of sun and sky. There was something vaguely
appropriate about our departure from those buried epochs; for as we wound our
panting way up the sixty-foot cylinder of primal masonry we glimpsed beside us
a continuous procession of heroic sculptures in the dead race’s early and
undecayed technique—a farewell from the Old Ones, written fifty million years
ago.
Finally scrambling out at the top, we found ourselves on a great mound of
tumbled blocks; with the curved walls of higher stonework rising westward, and
the brooding peaks of the great mountains shewing beyond the more crumbled
structures toward the east. The low antarctic sun of midnight peered redly from
the southern horizon through rifts in the jagged ruins, and the terrible age
and deadness of the nightmare city seemed all the starker by contrast with such
relatively known and accustomed things as the features of the polar landscape.
The sky above was a churning and opalescent mass of tenuous ice-vapours, and
the cold clutched at our vitals. Wearily resting the outfit-bags to which we
had instinctively clung throughout our desperate flight, we rebuttoned our
heavy garments for the stumbling climb down the mound and the walk through the
aeon-old stone maze to the foothills where our aëroplane waited. Of what had
set us fleeing from the darkness of earth’s secret and archaic gulfs we said
nothing at all.
In less than a quarter of an hour we had found the steep grade to the
foothills—the probable ancient terrace—by which we had descended, and could see
the dark bulk of our great plane amidst the sparse ruins on the rising slope
ahead. Half way uphill toward our goal we paused for a momentary
breathing-spell, and turned to look again at the fantastic palaeogean tangle of
incredible stone shapes below us—once more outlined mystically against an
unknown west. As we did so we saw that the sky beyond had lost its morning
haziness; the restless ice-vapours having moved up to the zenith, where their
mocking outlines seemed on the point of settling into some bizarre pattern
which they feared to make quite definite or conclusive.
There now lay revealed on the ultimate white horizon behind the grotesque city
a dim, elfin line of pinnacled violet whose needle-pointed heights loomed
dream-like against the beckoning rose-colour of the western sky. Up toward this
shimmering rim sloped the ancient table-land, the depressed course of the
bygone river traversing it as an irregular ribbon of shadow. For a second we
gasped in admiration of the scene’s unearthly cosmic beauty, and then vague
horror began to creep into our souls. For this far violet line could be nothing
else than the terrible mountains of the forbidden land—highest of earth’s peaks
and focus of earth’s evil; harbourers of nameless horrors and Archaean secrets;
shunned and prayed to by those who feared to carve their meaning; untrodden by
any living thing of earth, but visited by the sinister lightnings and sending
strange beams across the plains in the polar night—beyond doubt the unknown
archetype of that dreaded Kadath in the Cold Waste beyond abhorrent Leng,
whereof unholy primal legends hint evasively. We were the first human beings
ever to see them—and I hope to God we may be the last.
If the sculptured maps and pictures in that pre-human city had told truly,
these cryptic violet mountains could not be much less than 300 miles away; yet
none the less sharply did their dim elfin essence jut above that remote and
snowy rim, like the serrated edge of a monstrous alien planet about to rise
into unaccustomed heavens. Their height, then, must have been tremendous beyond
all known comparison—carrying them up into tenuous atmospheric strata peopled
by such gaseous wraiths as rash flyers have barely lived to whisper of after
unexplainable falls. Looking at them, I thought nervously of certain sculptured
hints of what the great bygone river had washed down into the city from their
accursed slopes—and wondered how much sense and how much folly had lain in the
fears of those Old Ones who carved them so reticently. I recalled how their
northerly end must come near the coast at Queen Mary Land, where even at that
moment Sir Douglas Mawson’s expedition was doubtless working less than a
thousand miles away; and hoped that no evil fate would give Sir Douglas and his
men a glimpse of what might lie beyond the protecting coastal range. Such
thoughts formed a measure of my overwrought condition at the time—and Danforth
seemed to be even worse.
Yet long before we had passed the great star-shaped ruin and reached our plane
our fears had become transferred to the lesser but vast enough range whose
re-crossing lay ahead of us. From these foothills the black, ruin-crusted
slopes reared up starkly and hideously against the east, again reminding us of
those strange Asian paintings of Nicholas Roerich; and when we thought of the
damnable honeycombs inside them, and of the frightful amorphous entities that
might have pushed their foetidly squirming way even to the topmost hollow
pinnacles, we could not face without panic the prospect of again sailing by
those suggestive skyward cave-mouths where the wind made sounds like an evil
musical piping over a wide range. To make matters worse, we saw distinct traces
of local mist around several of the summits—as poor Lake must have done when he
made that early mistake about volcanism—and thought shiveringly of that kindred
mist from which we had just escaped; of that, and of the blasphemous,
horror-fostering abyss whence all such vapours came.
All was well with the plane, and we clumsily hauled on our heavy flying furs.
Danforth got the engine started without trouble, and we made a very smooth
takeoff over the nightmare city. Below us the primal Cyclopean masonry spread
out as it had done when first we saw it—so short, yet infinitely long, a time
ago—and we began rising and turning to test the wind for our crossing through
the pass. At a very high level there must have been great disturbance, since
the ice-dust clouds of the zenith were doing all sorts of fantastic things; but
at 24,000 feet, the height we needed for the pass, we found navigation quite
practicable. As we drew close to the jutting peaks the wind’s strange piping
again became manifest, and I could see Danforth’s hands trembling at the
controls. Rank amateur though I was, I thought at that moment that I might be a
better navigator than he in effecting the dangerous crossing between pinnacles;
and when I made motions to change seats and take over his duties he did not
protest. I tried to keep all my skill and self-possession about me, and stared
at the sector of reddish farther sky betwixt the walls of the pass—resolutely
refusing to pay attention to the puffs of mountain-top vapour, and wishing that
I had wax-stopped ears like Ulysses’ men off the Sirens’ coast to keep that
disturbing wind-piping from my consciousness.
But Danforth, released from his piloting and keyed up to a dangerous nervous
pitch, could not keep quiet. I felt him turning and wriggling about as he
looked back at the terrible receding city, ahead at the cave-riddled,
cube-barnacled peaks, sidewise at the bleak sea of snowy, rampart-strown
foothills, and upward at the seething, grotesquely clouded sky. It was then,
just as I was trying to steer safely through the pass, that his mad shrieking
brought us so close to disaster by shattering my tight hold on myself and
causing me to fumble helplessly with the controls for a moment. A second
afterward my resolution triumphed and we made the crossing safely—yet I am
afraid that Danforth will never be the same again.
I have said that Danforth refused to tell me what final horror made him scream
out so insanely—a horror which, I feel sadly sure, is mainly responsible for
his present breakdown. We had snatches of shouted conversation above the wind’s
piping and the engine’s buzzing as we reached the safe side of the range and
swooped slowly down toward the camp, but that had mostly to do with the pledges
of secrecy we had made as we prepared to leave the nightmare city. Certain
things, we had agreed, were not for people to know and discuss lightly—and I
would not speak of them now but for the need of heading off that
Starkweather-Moore Expedition, and others, at any cost. It is absolutely
necessary, for the peace and safety of mankind, that some of earth’s dark, dead
corners and unplumbed depths be let alone; lest sleeping abnormalities wake to
resurgent life, and blasphemously surviving nightmares squirm and splash out of
their black lairs to newer and wider conquests.
All that Danforth has ever hinted is that the final horror was a mirage. It was
not, he declares, anything connected with the cubes and caves of echoing,
vaporous, wormily honeycombed mountains of madness which we crossed; but a
single fantastic, daemoniac glimpse, among the churning zenith-clouds, of what
lay back of those other violet westward mountains which the Old Ones had
shunned and feared. It is very probable that the thing was a sheer delusion
born of the previous stresses we had passed through, and of the actual though
unrecognised mirage of the dead transmontane city experienced near Lake’s camp
the day before; but it was so real to Danforth that he suffers from it still.
He has on rare occasions whispered disjointed and irresponsible things about
“the black pit”, “the carven rim”, “the proto-shoggoths”, “the windowless
solids with five dimensions”, “the nameless cylinder”, “the elder pharos”,
“Yog-Sothoth”, “the primal white jelly”, “the colour out of space”, “the
wings”, “the eyes in darkness”, “the moon-ladder”, “the original, the eternal,
the undying”, and other bizarre conceptions; but when he is fully himself he
repudiates all this and attributes it to his curious and macabre reading of
earlier years. Danforth, indeed, is known to be among the few who have ever
dared go completely through that worm-riddled copy of the Necronomicon kept
under lock and key in the college library.
The higher sky, as we crossed the range, was surely vaporous and disturbed
enough; and although I did not see the zenith I can well imagine that its
swirls of ice-dust may have taken strange forms. Imagination, knowing how
vividly distant scenes can sometimes be reflected, refracted, and magnified by
such layers of restless cloud, might easily have supplied the rest—and of
course Danforth did not hint any of those specific horrors till after his
memory had had a chance to draw on his bygone reading. He could never have seen
so much in one instantaneous glance.
At the time his shrieks were confined to the repetition of a single mad word of
all too obvious source:
“Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!”

I have frequently wondered if the majority of mankind ever pause to reflect
upon the occasionally titanic significance of dreams, and of the obscure world
to which they belong. Whilst the greater number of our nocturnal visions are
perhaps no more than faint and fantastic reflections of our waking
experiences—Freud to the contrary with his puerile symbolism—there are still a
certain remainder whose immundane and ethereal character permits of no ordinary
interpretation, and whose vaguely exciting and disquieting effect suggests
possible minute glimpses into a sphere of mental existence no less important
than physical life, yet separated from that life by an all but impassable
barrier. From my experience I cannot doubt but that man, when lost to
terrestrial consciousness, is indeed sojourning in another and uncorporeal life
of far different nature from the life we know; and of which only the slightest
and most indistinct memories linger after waking. From those blurred and
fragmentary memories we may infer much, yet prove little. We may guess that in
dreams life, matter, and vitality, as the earth knows such things, are not
necessarily constant; and that time and space do not exist as our waking selves
comprehend them. Sometimes I believe that this less material life is our truer
life, and that our vain presence on the terraqueous globe is itself the
secondary or merely virtual phenomenon.
It was from a youthful reverie filled with speculations of this sort that I
arose one afternoon in the winter of 1900–1901, when to the state psychopathic
institution in which I served as an interne was brought the man whose case has
ever since haunted me so unceasingly. His name, as given on the records, was
Joe Slater, or Slaader, and his appearance was that of the typical denizen of
the Catskill Mountain region; one of those strange, repellent scions of a
primitive colonial peasant stock whose isolation for nearly three centuries in
the hilly fastnesses of a little-travelled countryside has caused them to sink
to a kind of barbaric degeneracy, rather than advance with their more
fortunately placed brethren of the thickly settled districts. Among these odd
folk, who correspond exactly to the decadent element of “white trash” in the
South, law and morals are non-existent; and their general mental status is
probably below that of any other section of the native American people.
Joe Slater, who came to the institution in the vigilant custody of four state
policemen, and who was described as a highly dangerous character, certainly
presented no evidence of his perilous disposition when first I beheld him.
Though well above the middle stature, and of somewhat brawny frame, he was
given an absurd appearance of harmless stupidity by the pale, sleepy blueness
of his small watery eyes, the scantiness of his neglected and never-shaven
growth of yellow beard, and the listless drooping of his heavy nether lip. His
age was unknown, since among his kind neither family records nor permanent
family ties exist; but from the baldness of his head in front, and from the
decayed condition of his teeth, the head surgeon wrote him down as a man of
about forty.
From the medical and court documents we learned all that could be gathered of
his case. This man, a vagabond, hunter, and trapper, had always been strange in
the eyes of his primitive associates. He had habitually slept at night beyond
the ordinary time, and upon waking would often talk of unknown things in a
manner so bizarre as to inspire fear even in the hearts of an unimaginative
populace. Not that his form of language was at all unusual, for he never spoke
save in the debased patois of his environment; but the tone and tenor of his
utterances were of such mysterious wildness, that none might listen without
apprehension. He himself was generally as terrified and baffled as his
auditors, and within an hour after awakening would forget all that he had said,
or at least all that had caused him to say what he did; relapsing into a
bovine, half-amiable normality like that of the other hill-dwellers.
As Slater grew older, it appeared, his matutinal aberrations had gradually
increased in frequency and violence; till about a month before his arrival at
the institution had occurred the shocking tragedy which caused his arrest by
the authorities. One day near noon, after a profound sleep begun in a whiskey
debauch at about five of the previous afternoon, the man had roused himself
most suddenly; with ululations so horrible and unearthly that they brought
several neighbours to his cabin—a filthy sty where he dwelt with a family as
indescribable as himself. Rushing out into the snow, he had flung his arms
aloft and commenced a series of leaps directly upward in the air; the while
shouting his determination to reach some ‘big, big cabin with brightness in the
roof and walls and floor, and the loud queer music far away’. As two men of
moderate size sought to restrain him, he had struggled with maniacal force and
fury, screaming of his desire and need to find and kill a certain ‘thing that
shines and shakes and laughs’. At length, after temporarily felling one of his
detainers with a sudden blow, he had flung himself upon the other in a
daemoniac ecstasy of bloodthirstiness, shrieking fiendishly that he would ‘jump
high in the air and burn his way through anything that stopped him’. Family and
neighbours had now fled in a panic, and when the more courageous of them
returned, Slater was gone, leaving behind an unrecognisable pulp-like thing
that had been a living man but an hour before. None of the mountaineers had
dared to pursue him, and it is likely that they would have welcomed his death
from the cold; but when several mornings later they heard his screams from a
distant ravine, they realised that he had somehow managed to survive, and that
his removal in one way or another would be necessary. Then had followed an
armed searching party, whose purpose (whatever it may have been originally)
became that of a sheriff’s posse after one of the seldom popular state troopers
had by accident observed, then questioned, and finally joined the seekers.
On the third day Slater was found unconscious in the hollow of a tree, and
taken to the nearest gaol; where alienists from Albany examined him as soon as
his senses returned. To them he told a simple story. He had, he said, gone to
sleep one afternoon about sundown after drinking much liquor. He had awaked to
find himself standing bloody-handed in the snow before his cabin, the mangled
corpse of his neighbour Peter Slader at his feet. Horrified, he had taken to
the woods in a vague effort to escape from the scene of what must have been his
crime. Beyond these things he seemed to know nothing, nor could the expert
questioning of his interrogators bring out a single additional fact. That night
Slater slept quietly, and the next morning he wakened with no singular feature
save a certain alteration of expression. Dr. Barnard, who had been watching the
patient, thought he noticed in the pale blue eyes a certain gleam of peculiar
quality; and in the flaccid lips an all but imperceptible tightening, as if of
intelligent determination. But when questioned, Slater relapsed into the
habitual vacancy of the mountaineer, and only reiterated what he had said on
the preceding day.
On the third morning occurred the first of the man’s mental attacks. After some
show of uneasiness in sleep, he burst forth into a frenzy so powerful that the
combined efforts of four men were needed to bind him in a strait-jacket. The
alienists listened with keen attention to his words, since their curiosity had
been aroused to a high pitch by the suggestive yet mostly conflicting and
incoherent stories of his family and neighbours. Slater raved for upward of
fifteen minutes, babbling in his backwoods dialect of great edifices of light,
oceans of space, strange music, and shadowy mountains and valleys. But most of
all did he dwell upon some mysterious blazing entity that shook and laughed and
mocked at him. This vast, vague personality seemed to have done him a terrible
wrong, and to kill it in triumphant revenge was his paramount desire. In order
to reach it, he said, he would soar through abysses of emptiness, burning every
obstacle that stood in his way. Thus ran his discourse, until with the greatest
suddenness he ceased. The fire of madness died from his eyes, and in dull
wonder he looked at his questioners and asked why he was bound. Dr. Barnard
unbuckled the leathern harness and did not restore it till night, when he
succeeded in persuading Slater to don it of his own volition, for his own good.
The man had now admitted that he sometimes talked queerly, though he knew not
why.
Within a week two more attacks appeared, but from them the doctors learned
little. On the source of Slater’s visions they speculated at length, for since
he could neither read nor write, and had apparently never heard a legend or
fairy tale, his gorgeous imagery was quite inexplicable. That it could not come
from any known myth or romance was made especially clear by the fact that the
unfortunate lunatic expressed himself only in his own simple manner. He raved
of things he did not understand and could not interpret; things which he
claimed to have experienced, but which he could not have learned through any
normal or connected narration. The alienists soon agreed that abnormal dreams
were the foundation of the trouble; dreams whose vividness could for a time
completely dominate the waking mind of this basically inferior man. With due
formality Slater was tried for murder, acquitted on the ground of insanity, and
committed to the institution wherein I held so humble a post.
I have said that I am a constant speculator concerning dream life, and from
this you may judge of the eagerness with which I applied myself to the study of
the new patient as soon as I had fully ascertained the facts of his case. He
seemed to sense a certain friendliness in me; born no doubt of the interest I
could not conceal, and the gentle manner in which I questioned him. Not that he
ever recognised me during his attacks, when I hung breathlessly upon his
chaotic but cosmic word-pictures; but he knew me in his quiet hours, when he
would sit by his barred window weaving baskets of straw and willow, and perhaps
pining for the mountain freedom he could never enjoy again. His family never
called to see him; probably it had found another temporary head, after the
manner of decadent mountain folk.
By degrees I commenced to feel an overwhelming wonder at the mad and fantastic
conceptions of Joe Slater. The man himself was pitiably inferior in mentality
and language alike; but his glowing, titanic visions, though described in a
barbarous and disjointed jargon, were assuredly things which only a superior or
even exceptional brain could conceive. How, I often asked myself, could the
stolid imagination of a Catskill degenerate conjure up sights whose very
possession argued a lurking spark of genius? How could any backwoods dullard
have gained so much as an idea of those glittering realms of supernal radiance
and space about which Slater ranted in his furious delirium? More and more I
inclined to the belief that in the pitiful personality who cringed before me
lay the disordered nucleus of something beyond my comprehension; something
infinitely beyond the comprehension of my more experienced but less imaginative
medical and scientific colleagues.
And yet I could extract nothing definite from the man. The sum of all my
investigation was, that in a kind of semi-uncorporeal dream life Slater
wandered or floated through resplendent and prodigious valleys, meadows,
gardens, cities, and palaces of light; in a region unbounded and unknown to
man. That there he was no peasant or degenerate, but a creature of importance
and vivid life; moving proudly and dominantly, and checked only by a certain
deadly enemy, who seemed to be a being of visible yet ethereal structure, and
who did not appear to be of human shape, since Slater never referred to it as a
man, or as aught save a thing. This thing had done Slater some hideous but
unnamed wrong, which the maniac (if maniac he were) yearned to avenge. From the
manner in which Slater alluded to their dealings, I judged that he and the
luminous thing had met on equal terms; that in his dream existence the man was
himself a luminous thing of the same race as his enemy. This impression was
sustained by his frequent references to flying through space and burning all
that impeded his progress. Yet these conceptions were formulated in rustic
words wholly inadequate to convey them, a circumstance which drove me to the
conclusion that if a true dream-world indeed existed, oral language was not its
medium for the transmission of thought. Could it be that the dream-soul
inhabiting this inferior body was desperately struggling to speak things which
the simple and halting tongue of dulness could not utter? Could it be that I
was face to face with intellectual emanations which would explain the mystery
if I could but learn to discover and read them? I did not tell the older
physicians of these things, for middle age is sceptical, cynical, and
disinclined to accept new ideas. Besides, the head of the institution had but
lately warned me in his paternal way that I was overworking; that my mind
needed a rest.
It had long been my belief that human thought consists basically of atomic or
molecular motion, convertible into ether waves of radiant energy like heat,
light, and electricity. This belief had early led me to contemplate the
possibility of telepathy or mental communication by means of suitable
apparatus, and I had in my college days prepared a set of transmitting and
receiving instruments somewhat similar to the cumbrous devices employed in
wireless telegraphy at that crude, pre-radio period. These I had tested with a
fellow-student; but achieving no result, had soon packed them away with other
scientific odds and ends for possible future use. Now, in my intense desire to
probe into the dream life of Joe Slater, I sought these instruments again; and
spent several days in repairing them for action. When they were complete once
more I missed no opportunity for their trial. At each outburst of Slater’s
violence, I would fit the transmitter to his forehead and the receiver to my
own; constantly making delicate adjustments for various hypothetical
wave-lengths of intellectual energy. I had but little notion of how the
thought-impressions would, if successfully conveyed, arouse an intelligent
response in my brain; but I felt certain that I could detect and interpret
them. Accordingly I continued my experiments, though informing no one of their
nature.

It was on the twenty-first of February, 1901, that the thing finally occurred.
As I look back across the years I realise how unreal it seems; and sometimes
half wonder if old Dr. Fenton was not right when he charged it all to my
excited imagination. I recall that he listened with great kindness and patience
when I told him, but afterward gave me a nerve-powder and arranged for the
half-year’s vacation on which I departed the next week. That fateful night I
was wildly agitated and perturbed, for despite the excellent care he had
received, Joe Slater was unmistakably dying. Perhaps it was his mountain
freedom that he missed, or perhaps the turmoil in his brain had grown too acute
for his rather sluggish physique; but at all events the flame of vitality
flickered low in the decadent body. He was drowsy near the end, and as darkness
fell he dropped off into a troubled sleep. I did not strap on the strait-jacket
as was customary when he slept, since I saw that he was too feeble to be
dangerous, even if he woke in mental disorder once more before passing away.
But I did place upon his head and mine the two ends of my cosmic “radio”;
hoping against hope for a first and last message from the dream-world in the
brief time remaining. In the cell with us was one nurse, a mediocre fellow who
did not understand the purpose of the apparatus, or think to inquire into my
course. As the hours wore on I saw his head droop awkwardly in sleep, but I did
not disturb him. I myself, lulled by the rhythmical breathing of the healthy
and the dying man, must have nodded a little later.
The sound of weird lyric melody was what aroused me. Chords, vibrations, and
harmonic ecstasies echoed passionately on every hand; while on my ravished
sight burst the stupendous spectacle of ultimate beauty. Walls, columns, and
architraves of living fire blazed effulgently around the spot where I seemed to
float in air; extending upward to an infinitely high vaulted dome of
indescribable splendour. Blending with this display of palatial magnificence,
or rather, supplanting it at times in kaleidoscopic rotation, were glimpses of
wide plains and graceful valleys, high mountains and inviting grottoes; covered
with every lovely attribute of scenery which my delighted eye could conceive
of, yet formed wholly of some glowing, ethereal, plastic entity, which in
consistency partook as much of spirit as of matter. As I gazed, I perceived
that my own brain held the key to these enchanting metamorphoses; for each
vista which appeared to me, was the one my changing mind most wished to behold.
Amidst this elysian realm I dwelt not as a stranger, for each sight and sound
was familiar to me; just as it had been for uncounted aeons of eternity before,
and would be for like eternities to come.
Then the resplendent aura of my brother of light drew near and held colloquy
with me, soul to soul, with silent and perfect interchange of thought. The hour
was one of approaching triumph, for was not my fellow-being escaping at last
from a degrading periodic bondage; escaping forever, and preparing to follow
the accursed oppressor even unto the uttermost fields of ether, that upon it
might be wrought a flaming cosmic vengeance which would shake the spheres? We
floated thus for a little time, when I perceived a slight blurring and fading
of the objects around us, as though some force were recalling me to earth—where
I least wished to go. The form near me seemed to feel a change also, for it
gradually brought its discourse toward a conclusion, and itself prepared to
quit the scene; fading from my sight at a rate somewhat less rapid than that of
the other objects. A few more thoughts were exchanged, and I knew that the
luminous one and I were being recalled to bondage, though for my brother of
light it would be the last time. The sorry planet-shell being well-nigh spent,
in less than an hour my fellow would be free to pursue the oppressor along the
Milky Way and past the hither stars to the very confines of infinity.
A well-defined shock separates my final impression of the fading scene of light
from my sudden and somewhat shamefaced awakening and straightening up in my
chair as I saw the dying figure on the couch move hesitantly. Joe Slater was
indeed awaking, though probably for the last time. As I looked more closely, I
saw that in the sallow cheeks shone spots of colour which had never before been
present. The lips, too, seemed unusual; being tightly compressed, as if by the
force of a stronger character than had been Slater’s. The whole face finally
began to grow tense, and the head turned restlessly with closed eyes. I did not
arouse the sleeping nurse, but readjusted the slightly disarranged head-bands
of my telepathic “radio”, intent to catch any parting message the dreamer might
have to deliver. All at once the head turned sharply in my direction and the
eyes fell open, causing me to stare in blank amazement at what I beheld. The
man who had been Joe Slater, the Catskill decadent, was now gazing at me with a
pair of luminous, expanded eyes whose blue seemed subtly to have deepened.
Neither mania nor degeneracy was visible in that gaze, and I felt beyond a
doubt that I was viewing a face behind which lay an active mind of high order.
At this juncture my brain became aware of a steady external influence operating
upon it. I closed my eyes to concentrate my thoughts more profoundly, and was
rewarded by the positive knowledge that my long-sought mental message had come
at last. Each transmitted idea formed rapidly in my mind, and though no actual
language was employed, my habitual association of conception and expression was
so great that I seemed to be receiving the message in ordinary English.
“Joe Slater is dead,” came the soul-petrifying voice or agency from beyond the
wall of sleep. My opened eyes sought the couch of pain in curious horror, but
the blue eyes were still calmly gazing, and the countenance was still
intelligently animated. “He is better dead, for he was unfit to bear the active
intellect of cosmic entity. His gross body could not undergo the needed
adjustments between ethereal life and planet life. He was too much of an
animal, too little a man; yet it is through his deficiency that you have come
to discover me, for the cosmic and planet souls rightly should never meet. He
has been my torment and diurnal prison for forty-two of your terrestrial years.
I am an entity like that which you yourself become in the freedom of dreamless
sleep. I am your brother of light, and have floated with you in the effulgent
valleys. It is not permitted me to tell your waking earth-self of your real
self, but we are all roamers of vast spaces and travellers in many ages. Next
year I may be dwelling in the dark Egypt which you call ancient, or in the
cruel empire of Tsan-Chan which is to come three thousand years hence. You and
I have drifted to the worlds that reel about the red Arcturus, and dwelt in the
bodies of the insect-philosophers that crawl proudly over the fourth moon of
Jupiter. How little does the earth-self know of life and its extent! How
little, indeed, ought it to know for its own tranquillity! Of the oppressor I
cannot speak. You on earth have unwittingly felt its distant presence—you who
without knowing idly gave to its blinking beacon the name of Algol, the
Daemon-Star. It is to meet and conquer the oppressor that I have vainly striven
for aeons, held back by bodily encumbrances. Tonight I go as a Nemesis bearing
just and blazingly cataclysmic vengeance. Watch me in the sky close by the
Daemon-Star. I cannot speak longer, for the body of Joe Slater grows cold and
rigid, and the coarse brains are ceasing to vibrate as I wish. You have been my
friend in the cosmos; you have been my only friend on this planet—the only soul
to sense and seek for me within the repellent form which lies on this couch. We
shall meet again—perhaps in the shining mists of Orion’s Sword, perhaps on a
bleak plateau in prehistoric Asia. Perhaps in unremembered dreams tonight;
perhaps in some other form an aeon hence, when the solar system shall have been
swept away.”
At this point the thought-waves abruptly ceased, and the pale eyes of the
dreamer—or can I say dead man?—commenced to glaze fishily. In a half-stupor I
crossed over to the couch and felt of his wrist, but found it cold, stiff, and
pulseless. The sallow cheeks paled again, and the thick lips fell open,
disclosing the repulsively rotten fangs of the degenerate Joe Slater. I
shivered, pulled a blanket over the hideous face, and awakened the nurse. Then
I left the cell and went silently to my room. I had an insistent and
unaccountable craving for a sleep whose dreams I should not remember.
The climax? What plain tale of science can boast of such a rhetorical effect? I
have merely set down certain things appealing to me as facts, allowing you to
construe them as you will. As I have already admitted, my superior, old Dr.
Fenton, denies the reality of everything I have related. He vows that I was
broken down with nervous strain, and badly in need of the long vacation on full
pay which he so generously gave me. He assures me on his professional honour
that Joe Slater was but a low-grade paranoiac, whose fantastic notions must
have come from the crude hereditary folk-tales which circulate in even the most
decadent of communities. All this he tells me—yet I cannot forget what I saw in
the sky on the night after Slater died. Lest you think me a biassed witness,
another’s pen must add this final testimony, which may perhaps supply the
climax you expect. I will quote the following account of the star Nova Persei
verbatim from the pages of that eminent astronomical authority, Prof. Garrett
P. Serviss:

    “On February 22, 1901, a marvellous new star was discovered by Dr.
Anderson, of Edinburgh, not very far from Algol. No star had been visible at
that point before. Within twenty-four hours the stranger had become so bright
that it outshone Capella. In a week or two it had visibly faded, and in the
course of a few months it was hardly discernible with the naked eye.”

autious investigators will hesitate to challenge the common belief that Robert
Blake was killed by lightning, or by some profound nervous shock derived from
an electrical discharge. It is true that the window he faced was unbroken, but
Nature has shewn herself capable of many freakish performances. The expression
on his face may easily have arisen from some obscure muscular source unrelated
to anything he saw, while the entries in his diary are clearly the result of a
fantastic imagination aroused by certain local superstitions and by certain old
matters he had uncovered. As for the anomalous conditions at the deserted
church on Federal Hill—the shrewd analyst is not slow in attributing them to
some charlatanry, conscious or unconscious, with at least some of which Blake
was secretly connected.
For after all, the victim was a writer and painter wholly devoted to the field
of myth, dream, terror, and superstition, and avid in his quest for scenes and
effects of a bizarre, spectral sort. His earlier stay in the city—a visit to a
strange old man as deeply given to occult and forbidden lore as he—had ended
amidst death and flame, and it must have been some morbid instinct which drew
him back from his home in Milwaukee. He may have known of the old stories
despite his statements to the contrary in the diary, and his death may have
nipped in the bud some stupendous hoax destined to have a literary reflection.
Among those, however, who have examined and correlated all this evidence, there
remain several who cling to less rational and commonplace theories. They are
inclined to take much of Blake’s diary at its face value, and point
significantly to certain facts such as the undoubted genuineness of the old
church record, the verified existence of the disliked and unorthodox Starry
Wisdom sect prior to 1877, the recorded disappearance of an inquisitive
reporter named Edwin M. Lillibridge in 1893, and—above all—the look of
monstrous, transfiguring fear on the face of the young writer when he died. It
was one of these believers who, moved to fanatical extremes, threw into the bay
the curiously angled stone and its strangely adorned metal box found in the old
church steeple—the black windowless steeple, and not the tower where Blake’s
diary said those things originally were. Though widely censured both officially
and unofficially, this man—a reputable physician with a taste for odd
folklore—averred that he had rid the earth of something too dangerous to rest
upon it.
Between these two schools of opinion the reader must judge for himself. The
papers have given the tangible details from a sceptical angle, leaving for
others the drawing of the picture as Robert Blake saw it—or thought he saw
it—or pretended to see it. Now, studying the diary closely, dispassionately,
and at leisure, let us summarise the dark chain of events from the expressed
point of view of their chief actor.
Young Blake returned to Providence in the winter of 1934–5, taking the upper
floor of a venerable dwelling in a grassy court off College Street—on the crest
of the great eastward hill near the Brown University campus and behind the
marble John Hay Library. It was a cosy and fascinating place, in a little
garden oasis of village-like antiquity where huge, friendly cats sunned
themselves atop a convenient shed. The square Georgian house had a monitor
roof, classic doorway with fan carving, small-paned windows, and all the other
earmarks of early nineteenth-century workmanship. Inside were six-panelled
doors, wide floor-boards, a curving colonial staircase, white Adam-period
mantels, and a rear set of rooms three steps below the general level.
Blake’s study, a large southwest chamber, overlooked the front garden on one
side, while its west windows—before one of which he had his desk—faced off from
the brow of the hill and commanded a splendid view of the lower town’s
outspread roofs and of the mystical sunsets that flamed behind them. On the far
horizon were the open countryside’s purple slopes. Against these, some two
miles away, rose the spectral hump of Federal Hill, bristling with huddled
roofs and steeples whose remote outlines wavered mysteriously, taking fantastic
forms as the smoke of the city swirled up and enmeshed them. Blake had a
curious sense that he was looking upon some unknown, ethereal world which might
or might not vanish in dream if ever he tried to seek it out and enter it in
person.
Having sent home for most of his books, Blake bought some antique furniture
suitable to his quarters and settled down to write and paint—living alone, and
attending to the simple housework himself. His studio was in a north attic
room, where the panes of the monitor roof furnished admirable lighting. During
that first winter he produced five of his best-known short stories—“The
Burrower Beneath”, “The Stairs in the Crypt”, “Shaggai”, “In the Vale of
Pnath”, and “The Feaster from the Stars”—and painted seven canvases; studies of
nameless, unhuman monsters, and profoundly alien, non-terrestrial landscapes.
At sunset he would often sit at his desk and gaze dreamily off at the outspread
west—the dark towers of Memorial Hall just below, the Georgian court-house
belfry, the lofty pinnacles of the downtown section, and that shimmering,
spire-crowned mound in the distance whose unknown streets and labyrinthine
gables so potently provoked his fancy. From his few local acquaintances he
learned that the far-off slope was a vast Italian quarter, though most of the
houses were remnants of older Yankee and Irish days. Now and then he would
train his field-glasses on that spectral, unreachable world beyond the curling
smoke; picking out individual roofs and chimneys and steeples, and speculating
upon the bizarre and curious mysteries they might house. Even with optical aid
Federal Hill seemed somehow alien, half fabulous, and linked to the unreal,
intangible marvels of Blake’s own tales and pictures. The feeling would persist
long after the hill had faded into the violet, lamp-starred twilight, and the
court-house floodlights and the red Industrial Trust beacon had blazed up to
make the night grotesque.
Of all the distant objects on Federal Hill, a certain huge, dark church most
fascinated Blake. It stood out with especial distinctness at certain hours of
the day, and at sunset the great tower and tapering steeple loomed blackly
against the flaming sky. It seemed to rest on especially high ground; for the
grimy facade, and the obliquely seen north side with sloping roof and the tops
of great pointed windows, rose boldly above the tangle of surrounding
ridgepoles and chimney-pots. Peculiarly grim and austere, it appeared to be
built of stone, stained and weathered with the smoke and storms of a century
and more. The style, so far as the glass could shew, was that earliest
experimental form of Gothic revival which preceded the stately Upjohn period
and held over some of the outlines and proportions of the Georgian age. Perhaps
it was reared around 1810 or 1815.
As months passed, Blake watched the far-off, forbidding structure with an oddly
mounting interest. Since the vast windows were never lighted, he knew that it
must be vacant. The longer he watched, the more his imagination worked, till at
length he began to fancy curious things. He believed that a vague, singular
aura of desolation hovered over the place, so that even the pigeons and
swallows shunned its smoky eaves. Around other towers and belfries his glass
would reveal great flocks of birds, but here they never rested. At least, that
is what he thought and set down in his diary. He pointed the place out to
several friends, but none of them had even been on Federal Hill or possessed
the faintest notion of what the church was or had been.
In the spring a deep restlessness gripped Blake. He had begun his long-planned
novel—based on a supposed survival of the witch-cult in Maine—but was strangely
unable to make progress with it. More and more he would sit at his westward
window and gaze at the distant hill and the black, frowning steeple shunned by
the birds. When the delicate leaves came out on the garden boughs the world was
filled with a new beauty, but Blake’s restlessness was merely increased. It was
then that he first thought of crossing the city and climbing bodily up that
fabulous slope into the smoke-wreathed world of dream.
Late in April, just before the aeon-shadowed Walpurgis time, Blake made his
first trip into the unknown. Plodding through the endless downtown streets and
the bleak, decayed squares beyond, he came finally upon the ascending avenue of
century-worn steps, sagging Doric porches, and blear-paned cupolas which he
felt must lead up to the long-known, unreachable world beyond the mists. There
were dingy blue-and-white street signs which meant nothing to him, and
presently he noted the strange, dark faces of the drifting crowds, and the
foreign signs over curious shops in brown, decade-weathered buildings. Nowhere
could he find any of the objects he had seen from afar; so that once more he
half fancied that the Federal Hill of that distant view was a dream-world never
to be trod by living human feet.
Now and then a battered church facade or crumbling spire came in sight, but
never the blackened pile that he sought. When he asked a shopkeeper about a
great stone church the man smiled and shook his head, though he spoke English
freely. As Blake climbed higher, the region seemed stranger and stranger, with
bewildering mazes of brooding brown alleys leading eternally off to the south.
He crossed two or three broad avenues, and once thought he glimpsed a familiar
tower. Again he asked a merchant about the massive church of stone, and this
time he could have sworn that the plea of ignorance was feigned. The dark man’s
face had a look of fear which he tried to hide, and Blake saw him make a
curious sign with his right hand.
Then suddenly a black spire stood out against the cloudy sky on his left, above
the tiers of brown roofs lining the tangled southerly alleys. Blake knew at
once what it was, and plunged toward it through the squalid, unpaved lanes that
climbed from the avenue. Twice he lost his way, but he somehow dared not ask
any of the patriarchs or housewives who sat on their doorsteps, or any of the
children who shouted and played in the mud of the shadowy lanes.
At last he saw the tower plain against the southwest, and a huge stone bulk
rose darkly at the end of an alley. Presently he stood in a windswept open
square, quaintly cobblestoned, with a high bank wall on the farther side. This
was the end of his quest; for upon the wide, iron-railed, weed-grown plateau
which the wall supported—a separate, lesser world raised fully six feet above
the surrounding streets—there stood a grim, titan bulk whose identity, despite
Blake’s new perspective, was beyond dispute.
The vacant church was in a state of great decrepitude. Some of the high stone
buttresses had fallen, and several delicate finials lay half lost among the
brown, neglected weeds and grasses. The sooty Gothic windows were largely
unbroken, though many of the stone mullions were missing. Blake wondered how
the obscurely painted panes could have survived so well, in view of the known
habits of small boys the world over. The massive doors were intact and tightly
closed. Around the top of the bank wall, fully enclosing the grounds, was a
rusty iron fence whose gate—at the head of a flight of steps from the
square—was visibly padlocked. The path from the gate to the building was
completely overgrown. Desolation and decay hung like a pall above the place,
and in the birdless eaves and black, ivyless walls Blake felt a touch of the
dimly sinister beyond his power to define.
There were very few people in the square, but Blake saw a policeman at the
northerly end and approached him with questions about the church. He was a
great wholesome Irishman, and it seemed odd that he would do little more than
make the sign of the cross and mutter that people never spoke of that building.
When Blake pressed him he said very hurriedly that the Italian priests warned
everybody against it, vowing that a monstrous evil had once dwelt there and
left its mark. He himself had heard dark whispers of it from his father, who
recalled certain sounds and rumours from his boyhood.
There had been a bad sect there in the ould days—an outlaw sect that called up
awful things from some unknown gulf of night. It had taken a good priest to
exorcise what had come, though there did be those who said that merely the
light could do it. If Father O’Malley were alive there would be many the thing
he could tell. But now there was nothing to do but let it alone. It hurt nobody
now, and those that owned it were dead or far away. They had run away like rats
after the threatening talk in ’77, when people began to mind the way folks
vanished now and then in the neighbourhood. Some day the city would step in and
take the property for lack of heirs, but little good would come of anybody’s
touching it. Better it be left alone for the years to topple, lest things be
stirred that ought to rest forever in their black abyss.
After the policeman had gone Blake stood staring at the sullen steepled pile.
It excited him to find that the structure seemed as sinister to others as to
him, and he wondered what grain of truth might lie behind the old tales the
bluecoat had repeated. Probably they were mere legends evoked by the evil look
of the place, but even so, they were like a strange coming to life of one of
his own stories.
The afternoon sun came out from behind dispersing clouds, but seemed unable to
light up the stained, sooty walls of the old temple that towered on its high
plateau. It was odd that the green of spring had not touched the brown,
withered growths in the raised, iron-fenced yard. Blake found himself edging
nearer the raised area and examining the bank wall and rusted fence for
possible avenues of ingress. There was a terrible lure about the blackened fane
which was not to be resisted. The fence had no opening near the steps, but
around on the north side were some missing bars. He could go up the steps and
walk around on the narrow coping outside the fence till he came to the gap. If
the people feared the place so wildly, he would encounter no interference.
He was on the embankment and almost inside the fence before anyone noticed him.
Then, looking down, he saw the few people in the square edging away and making
the same sign with their right hands that the shopkeeper in the avenue had
made. Several windows were slammed down, and a fat woman darted into the street
and pulled some small children inside a rickety, unpainted house. The gap in
the fence was very easy to pass through, and before long Blake found himself
wading amidst the rotting, tangled growths of the deserted yard. Here and there
the worn stump of a headstone told him that there had once been burials in this
field; but that, he saw, must have been very long ago. The sheer bulk of the
church was oppressive now that he was close to it, but he conquered his mood
and approached to try the three great doors in the facade. All were securely
locked, so he began a circuit of the Cyclopean building in quest of some minor
and more penetrable opening. Even then he could not be sure that he wished to
enter that haunt of desertion and shadow, yet the pull of its strangeness
dragged him on automatically.
A yawning and unprotected cellar window in the rear furnished the needed
aperture. Peering in, Blake saw a subterrene gulf of cobwebs and dust faintly
litten by the western sun’s filtered rays. Debris, old barrels, and ruined
boxes and furniture of numerous sorts met his eye, though over everything lay a
shroud of dust which softened all sharp outlines. The rusted remains of a
hot-air furnace shewed that the building had been used and kept in shape as
late as mid-Victorian times.
Acting almost without conscious initiative, Blake crawled through the window
and let himself down to the dust-carpeted and debris-strown concrete floor. The
vaulted cellar was a vast one, without partitions; and in a corner far to the
right, amid dense shadows, he saw a black archway evidently leading upstairs.
He felt a peculiar sense of oppression at being actually within the great
spectral building, but kept it in check as he cautiously scouted about—finding
a still-intact barrel amid the dust, and rolling it over to the open window to
provide for his exit. Then, bracing himself, he crossed the wide,
cobweb-festooned space toward the arch. Half choked with the omnipresent dust,
and covered with ghostly gossamer fibres, he reached and began to climb the
worn stone steps which rose into the darkness. He had no light, but groped
carefully with his hands. After a sharp turn he felt a closed door ahead, and a
little fumbling revealed its ancient latch. It opened inward, and beyond it he
saw a dimly illumined corridor lined with worm-eaten panelling.
Once on the ground floor, Blake began exploring in a rapid fashion. All the
inner doors were unlocked, so that he freely passed from room to room. The
colossal nave was an almost eldritch place with its drifts and mountains of
dust over box pews, altar, hourglass pulpit, and sounding-board, and its
titanic ropes of cobweb stretching among the pointed arches of the gallery and
entwining the clustered Gothic columns. Over all this hushed desolation played
a hideous leaden light as the declining afternoon sun sent its rays through the
strange, half-blackened panes of the great apsidal windows.
The paintings on those windows were so obscured by soot that Blake could
scarcely decipher what they had represented, but from the little he could make
out he did not like them. The designs were largely conventional, and his
knowledge of obscure symbolism told him much concerning some of the ancient
patterns. The few saints depicted bore expressions distinctly open to
criticism, while one of the windows seemed to shew merely a dark space with
spirals of curious luminosity scattered about in it. Turning away from the
windows, Blake noticed that the cobwebbed cross above the altar was not of the
ordinary kind, but resembled the primordial ankh or crux ansata of shadowy
Egypt.
In a rear vestry room beside the apse Blake found a rotting desk and
ceiling-high shelves of mildewed, disintegrating books. Here for the first time
he received a positive shock of objective horror, for the titles of those books
told him much. They were the black, forbidden things which most sane people
have never even heard of, or have heard of only in furtive, timorous whispers;
the banned and dreaded repositories of equivocal secrets and immemorial
formulae which have trickled down the stream of time from the days of man’s
youth, and the dim, fabulous days before man was. He had himself read many of
them—a Latin version of the abhorred Necronomicon, the sinister Liber Ivonis,
the infamous Cultes des Goules of Comte d’Erlette, the Unaussprechlichen Kulten
of von Junzt, and old Ludvig Prinn’s hellish De Vermis Mysteriis. But there
were others he had known merely by reputation or not at all—the Pnakotic
Manuscripts, the Book of Dzyan, and a crumbling volume in wholly unidentifiable
characters yet with certain symbols and diagrams shudderingly recognisable to
the occult student. Clearly, the lingering local rumours had not lied. This
place had once been the seat of an evil older than mankind and wider than the
known universe.
In the ruined desk was a small leather-bound record-book filled with entries in
some odd cryptographic medium. The manuscript writing consisted of the common
traditional symbols used today in astronomy and anciently in alchemy,
astrology, and other dubious arts—the devices of the sun, moon, planets,
aspects, and zodiacal signs—here massed in solid pages of text, with divisions
and paragraphings suggesting that each symbol answered to some alphabetical
letter.
In the hope of later solving the cryptogram, Blake bore off this volume in his
coat pocket. Many of the great tomes on the shelves fascinated him unutterably,
and he felt tempted to borrow them at some later time. He wondered how they
could have remained undisturbed so long. Was he the first to conquer the
clutching, pervasive fear which had for nearly sixty years protected this
deserted place from visitors?
Having now thoroughly explored the ground floor, Blake ploughed again through
the dust of the spectral nave to the front vestibule, where he had seen a door
and staircase presumably leading up to the blackened tower and steeple—objects
so long familiar to him at a distance. The ascent was a choking experience, for
dust lay thick, while the spiders had done their worst in this constricted
place. The staircase was a spiral with high, narrow wooden treads, and now and
then Blake passed a clouded window looking dizzily out over the city. Though he
had seen no ropes below, he expected to find a bell or peal of bells in the
tower whose narrow, louver-boarded lancet windows his field-glass had studied
so often. Here he was doomed to disappointment; for when he attained the top of
the stairs he found the tower chamber vacant of chimes, and clearly devoted to
vastly different purposes.
The room, about fifteen feet square, was faintly lighted by four lancet
windows, one on each side, which were glazed within their screening of decayed
louver-boards. These had been further fitted with tight, opaque screens, but
the latter were now largely rotted away. In the centre of the dust-laden floor
rose a curiously angled stone pillar some four feet in height and two in
average diameter, covered on each side with bizarre, crudely incised, and
wholly unrecognisable hieroglyphs. On this pillar rested a metal box of
peculiarly asymmetrical form; its hinged lid thrown back, and its interior
holding what looked beneath the decade-deep dust to be an egg-shaped or
irregularly spherical object some four inches through. Around the pillar in a
rough circle were seven high-backed Gothic chairs still largely intact, while
behind them, ranging along the dark-panelled walls, were seven colossal images
of crumbling, black-painted plaster, resembling more than anything else the
cryptic carven megaliths of mysterious Easter Island. In one corner of the
cobwebbed chamber a ladder was built into the wall, leading up to the closed
trap-door of the windowless steeple above.
As Blake grew accustomed to the feeble light he noticed odd bas-reliefs on the
strange open box of yellowish metal. Approaching, he tried to clear the dust
away with his hands and handkerchief, and saw that the figurings were of a
monstrous and utterly alien kind; depicting entities which, though seemingly
alive, resembled no known life-form ever evolved on this planet. The four-inch
seeming sphere turned out to be a nearly black, red-striated polyhedron with
many irregular flat surfaces; either a very remarkable crystal of some sort, or
an artificial object of carved and highly polished mineral matter. It did not
touch the bottom of the box, but was held suspended by means of a metal band
around its centre, with seven queerly designed supports extending horizontally
to angles of the box’s inner wall near the top. This stone, once exposed,
exerted upon Blake an almost alarming fascination. He could scarcely tear his
eyes from it, and as he looked at its glistening surfaces he almost fancied it
was transparent, with half-formed worlds of wonder within. Into his mind
floated pictures of alien orbs with great stone towers, and other orbs with
titan mountains and no mark of life, and still remoter spaces where only a
stirring in vague blacknesses told of the presence of consciousness and will.
When he did look away, it was to notice a somewhat singular mound of dust in
the far corner near the ladder to the steeple. Just why it took his attention
he could not tell, but something in its contours carried a message to his
unconscious mind. Ploughing toward it, and brushing aside the hanging cobwebs
as he went, he began to discern something grim about it. Hand and handkerchief
soon revealed the truth, and Blake gasped with a baffling mixture of emotions.
It was a human skeleton, and it must have been there for a very long time. The
clothing was in shreds, but some buttons and fragments of cloth bespoke a man’s
grey suit. There were other bits of evidence—shoes, metal clasps, huge buttons
for round cuffs, a stickpin of bygone pattern, a reporter’s badge with the name
of the old Providence Telegram, and a crumbling leather pocketbook. Blake
examined the latter with care, finding within it several bills of antiquated
issue, a celluloid advertising calendar for 1893, some cards with the name
“Edwin M. Lillibridge”, and a paper covered with pencilled memoranda.
This paper held much of a puzzling nature, and Blake read it carefully at the
dim westward window. Its disjointed text included such phrases as the
following:

    “Prof. Enoch Bowen home from Egypt May 1844—buys old Free-Will Church in
July—his archaeological work & studies in occult well known.”
    “Dr. Drowne of 4th Baptist warns against Starry Wisdom in sermon Dec. 29,
1844.”
    “Congregation 97 by end of ’45.”
    “1846—3 disappearances—first mention of Shining Trapezohedron.”
    “7 disappearances 1848—stories of blood sacrifice begin.”
    “Investigation 1853 comes to nothing—stories of sounds.”
    “Fr. O’Malley tells of devil-worship with box found in great Egyptian
ruins—says they call up something that can’t exist in light. Flees a little
light, and banished by strong light. Then has to be summoned again. Probably
got this from deathbed confession of Francis X. Feeney, who had joined Starry
Wisdom in ’49. These people say the Shining Trapezohedron shews them heaven &
other worlds, & that the Haunter of the Dark tells them secrets in some way.”
    “Story of Orrin B. Eddy 1857. They call it up by gazing at the crystal, &
have a secret language of their own.”
    “200 or more in cong. 1863, exclusive of men at front.”
    “Irish boys mob church in 1869 after Patrick Regan’s disappearance.”
    “Veiled article in J. March 14, ’72, but people don’t talk about it.”
    “6 disappearances 1876—secret committee calls on Mayor Doyle.”
    “Action promised Feb. 1877—church closes in April.”
    “Gang—Federal Hill Boys—threaten Dr. —— and vestrymen in May.”
    “181 persons leave city before end of ’77—mention no names.”
    “Ghost stories begin around 1880—try to ascertain truth of report that no
human being has entered church since 1877.”
    “Ask Lanigan for photograph of place taken 1851.” . . .

Restoring the paper to the pocketbook and placing the latter in his coat, Blake
turned to look down at the skeleton in the dust. The implications of the notes
were clear, and there could be no doubt but that this man had come to the
deserted edifice forty-two years before in quest of a newspaper sensation which
no one else had been bold enough to attempt. Perhaps no one else had known of
his plan—who could tell? But he had never returned to his paper. Had some
bravely suppressed fear risen to overcome him and bring on sudden
heart-failure? Blake stooped over the gleaming bones and noted their peculiar
state. Some of them were badly scattered, and a few seemed oddly dissolved at
the ends. Others were strangely yellowed, with vague suggestions of charring.
This charring extended to some of the fragments of clothing. The skull was in a
very peculiar state—stained yellow, and with a charred aperture in the top as
if some powerful acid had eaten through the solid bone. What had happened to
the skeleton during its four decades of silent entombment here Blake could not
imagine.
Before he realised it, he was looking at the stone again, and letting its
curious influence call up a nebulous pageantry in his mind. He saw processions
of robed, hooded figures whose outlines were not human, and looked on endless
leagues of desert lined with carved, sky-reaching monoliths. He saw towers and
walls in nighted depths under the sea, and vortices of space where wisps of
black mist floated before thin shimmerings of cold purple haze. And beyond all
else he glimpsed an infinite gulf of darkness, where solid and semi-solid forms
were known only by their windy stirrings, and cloudy patterns of force seemed
to superimpose order on chaos and hold forth a key to all the paradoxes and
arcana of the worlds we know.
Then all at once the spell was broken by an access of gnawing, indeterminate
panic fear. Blake choked and turned away from the stone, conscious of some
formless alien presence close to him and watching him with horrible intentness.
He felt entangled with something—something which was not in the stone, but
which had looked through it at him—something which would ceaselessly follow him
with a cognition that was not physical sight. Plainly, the place was getting on
his nerves—as well it might in view of his gruesome find. The light was waning,
too, and since he had no illuminant with him he knew he would have to be
leaving soon.
It was then, in the gathering twilight, that he thought he saw a faint trace of
luminosity in the crazily angled stone. He had tried to look away from it, but
some obscure compulsion drew his eyes back. Was there a subtle phosphorescence
of radio-activity about the thing? What was it that the dead man’s notes had
said concerning a Shining Trapezohedron? What, anyway, was this abandoned lair
of cosmic evil? What had been done here, and what might still be lurking in the
bird-shunned shadows? It seemed now as if an elusive touch of foetor had arisen
somewhere close by, though its source was not apparent. Blake seized the cover
of the long-open box and snapped it down. It moved easily on its alien hinges,
and closed completely over the unmistakably glowing stone.
At the sharp click of that closing a soft stirring sound seemed to come from
the steeple’s eternal blackness overhead, beyond the trap-door. Rats, without
question—the only living things to reveal their presence in this accursed pile
since he had entered it. And yet that stirring in the steeple frightened him
horribly, so that he plunged almost wildly down the spiral stairs, across the
ghoulish nave, into the vaulted basement, out amidst the gathering dusk of the
deserted square, and down through the teeming, fear-haunted alleys and avenues
of Federal Hill toward the sane central streets and the home-like brick
sidewalks of the college district.
During the days which followed, Blake told no one of his expedition. Instead,
he read much in certain books, examined long years of newspaper files downtown,
and worked feverishly at the cryptogram in that leather volume from the
cobwebbed vestry room. The cipher, he soon saw, was no simple one; and after a
long period of endeavour he felt sure that its language could not be English,
Latin, Greek, French, Spanish, Italian, or German. Evidently he would have to
draw upon the deepest wells of his strange erudition.
Every evening the old impulse to gaze westward returned, and he saw the black
steeple as of yore amongst the bristling roofs of a distant and half-fabulous
world. But now it held a fresh note of terror for him. He knew the heritage of
evil lore it masked, and with the knowledge his vision ran riot in queer new
ways. The birds of spring were returning, and as he watched their sunset
flights he fancied they avoided the gaunt, lone spire as never before. When a
flock of them approached it, he thought, they would wheel and scatter in panic
confusion—and he could guess at the wild twitterings which failed to reach him
across the intervening miles.
It was in June that Blake’s diary told of his victory over the cryptogram. The
text was, he found, in the dark Aklo language used by certain cults of evil
antiquity, and known to him in a halting way through previous researches. The
diary is strangely reticent about what Blake deciphered, but he was patently
awed and disconcerted by his results. There are references to a Haunter of the
Dark awaked by gazing into the Shining Trapezohedron, and insane conjectures
about the black gulfs of chaos from which it was called. The being is spoken of
as holding all knowledge, and demanding monstrous sacrifices. Some of Blake’s
entries shew fear lest the thing, which he seemed to regard as summoned, stalk
abroad; though he adds that the street-lights form a bulwark which cannot be
crossed.
Of the Shining Trapezohedron he speaks often, calling it a window on all time
and space, and tracing its history from the days it was fashioned on dark
Yuggoth, before ever the Old Ones brought it to earth. It was treasured and
placed in its curious box by the crinoid things of Antarctica, salvaged from
their ruins by the serpent-men of Valusia, and peered at aeons later in Lemuria
by the first human beings. It crossed strange lands and stranger seas, and sank
with Atlantis before a Minoan fisher meshed it in his net and sold it to
swarthy merchants from nighted Khem. The Pharaoh Nephren-Ka built around it a
temple with a windowless crypt, and did that which caused his name to be
stricken from all monuments and records. Then it slept in the ruins of that
evil fane which the priests and the new Pharaoh destroyed, till the delver’s
spade once more brought it forth to curse mankind.
Early in July the newspapers oddly supplement Blake’s entries, though in so
brief and casual a way that only the diary has called general attention to
their contribution. It appears that a new fear had been growing on Federal Hill
since a stranger had entered the dreaded church. The Italians whispered of
unaccustomed stirrings and bumpings and scrapings in the dark windowless
steeple, and called on their priests to banish an entity which haunted their
dreams. Something, they said, was constantly watching at a door to see if it
were dark enough to venture forth. Press items mentioned the long-standing
local superstitions, but failed to shed much light on the earlier background of
the horror. It was obvious that the young reporters of today are no
antiquarians. In writing of these things in his diary, Blake expresses a
curious kind of remorse, and talks of the duty of burying the Shining
Trapezohedron and of banishing what he had evoked by letting daylight into the
hideous jutting spire. At the same time, however, he displays the dangerous
extent of his fascination, and admits a morbid longing—pervading even his
dreams—to visit the accursed tower and gaze again into the cosmic secrets of
the glowing stone.
Then something in the Journal on the morning of July 17 threw the diarist into
a veritable fever of horror. It was only a variant of the other half-humorous
items about the Federal Hill restlessness, but to Blake it was somehow very
terrible indeed. In the night a thunderstorm had put the city’s lighting-system
out of commission for a full hour, and in that black interval the Italians had
nearly gone mad with fright. Those living near the dreaded church had sworn
that the thing in the steeple had taken advantage of the street-lamps’ absence
and gone down into the body of the church, flopping and bumping around in a
viscous, altogether dreadful way. Toward the last it had bumped up to the
tower, where there were sounds of the shattering of glass. It could go wherever
the darkness reached, but light would always send it fleeing.
When the current blazed on again there had been a shocking commotion in the
tower, for even the feeble light trickling through the grime-blackened,
louver-boarded windows was too much for the thing. It had bumped and slithered
up into its tenebrous steeple just in time—for a long dose of light would have
sent it back into the abyss whence the crazy stranger had called it. During the
dark hour praying crowds had clustered round the church in the rain with
lighted candles and lamps somehow shielded with folded paper and umbrellas—a
guard of light to save the city from the nightmare that stalks in darkness.
Once, those nearest the church declared, the outer door had rattled hideously.
But even this was not the worst. That evening in the Bulletin Blake read of
what the reporters had found. Aroused at last to the whimsical news value of
the scare, a pair of them had defied the frantic crowds of Italians and crawled
into the church through the cellar window after trying the doors in vain. They
found the dust of the vestibule and of the spectral nave ploughed up in a
singular way, with bits of rotted cushions and satin pew-linings scattered
curiously around. There was a bad odour everywhere, and here and there were
bits of yellow stain and patches of what looked like charring. Opening the door
to the tower, and pausing a moment at the suspicion of a scraping sound above,
they found the narrow spiral stairs wiped roughly clean.
In the tower itself a similarly half-swept condition existed. They spoke of the
heptagonal stone pillar, the overturned Gothic chairs, and the bizarre plaster
images; though strangely enough the metal box and the old mutilated skeleton
were not mentioned. What disturbed Blake the most—except for the hints of
stains and charring and bad odours—was the final detail that explained the
crashing glass. Every one of the tower’s lancet windows was broken, and two of
them had been darkened in a crude and hurried way by the stuffing of satin
pew-linings and cushion-horsehair into the spaces between the slanting exterior
louver-boards. More satin fragments and bunches of horsehair lay scattered
around the newly swept floor, as if someone had been interrupted in the act of
restoring the tower to the absolute blackness of its tightly curtained days.
Yellowish stains and charred patches were found on the ladder to the windowless
spire, but when a reporter climbed up, opened the horizontally sliding
trap-door, and shot a feeble flashlight beam into the black and strangely
foetid space, he saw nothing but darkness, and an heterogeneous litter of
shapeless fragments near the aperture. The verdict, of course, was charlatanry.
Somebody had played a joke on the superstitious hill-dwellers, or else some
fanatic had striven to bolster up their fears for their own supposed good. Or
perhaps some of the younger and more sophisticated dwellers had staged an
elaborate hoax on the outside world. There was an amusing aftermath when the
police sent an officer to verify the reports. Three men in succession found
ways of evading the assignment, and the fourth went very reluctantly and
returned very soon without adding to the account given by the reporters.
From this point onward Blake’s diary shews a mounting tide of insidious horror
and nervous apprehension. He upbraids himself for not doing something, and
speculates wildly on the consequences of another electrical breakdown. It has
been verified that on three occasions—during thunderstorms—he telephoned the
electric light company in a frantic vein and asked that desperate precautions
against a lapse of power be taken. Now and then his entries shew concern over
the failure of the reporters to find the metal box and stone, and the strangely
marred old skeleton, when they explored the shadowy tower room. He assumed that
these things had been removed—whither, and by whom or what, he could only
guess. But his worst fears concerned himself, and the kind of unholy rapport he
felt to exist between his mind and that lurking horror in the distant
steeple—that monstrous thing of night which his rashness had called out of the
ultimate black spaces. He seemed to feel a constant tugging at his will, and
callers of that period remember how he would sit abstractedly at his desk and
stare out of the west window at that far-off, spire-bristling mound beyond the
swirling smoke of the city. His entries dwell monotonously on certain terrible
dreams, and of a strengthening of the unholy rapport in his sleep. There is
mention of a night when he awaked to find himself fully dressed, outdoors, and
headed automatically down College Hill toward the west. Again and again he
dwells on the fact that the thing in the steeple knows where to find him.
The week following July 30 is recalled as the time of Blake’s partial
breakdown. He did not dress, and ordered all his food by telephone. Visitors
remarked the cords he kept near his bed, and he said that sleep-walking had
forced him to bind his ankles every night with knots which would probably hold
or else waken him with the labour of untying.
In his diary he told of the hideous experience which had brought the collapse.
After retiring on the night of the 30th he had suddenly found himself groping
about in an almost black space. All he could see were short, faint, horizontal
streaks of bluish light, but he could smell an overpowering foetor and hear a
curious jumble of soft, furtive sounds above him. Whenever he moved he stumbled
over something, and at each noise there would come a sort of answering sound
from above—a vague stirring, mixed with the cautious sliding of wood on wood.
Once his groping hands encountered a pillar of stone with a vacant top, whilst
later he found himself clutching the rungs of a ladder built into the wall, and
fumbling his uncertain way upward toward some region of intenser stench where a
hot, searing blast beat down against him. Before his eyes a kaleidoscopic range
of phantasmal images played, all of them dissolving at intervals into the
picture of a vast, unplumbed abyss of night wherein whirled suns and worlds of
an even profounder blackness. He thought of the ancient legends of Ultimate
Chaos, at whose centre sprawls the blind idiot god Azathoth, Lord of All
Things, encircled by his flopping horde of mindless and amorphous dancers, and
lulled by the thin monotonous piping of a daemoniac flute held in nameless
paws.
Then a sharp report from the outer world broke through his stupor and roused
him to the unutterable horror of his position. What it was, he never
knew—perhaps it was some belated peal from the fireworks heard all summer on
Federal Hill as the dwellers hail their various patron saints, or the saints of
their native villages in Italy. In any event he shrieked aloud, dropped
frantically from the ladder, and stumbled blindly across the obstructed floor
of the almost lightless chamber that encompassed him.
He knew instantly where he was, and plunged recklessly down the narrow spiral
staircase, tripping and bruising himself at every turn. There was a nightmare
flight through a vast cobwebbed nave whose ghostly arches reached up to realms
of leering shadow, a sightless scramble through a littered basement, a climb to
regions of air and street-lights outside, and a mad racing down a spectral hill
of gibbering gables, across a grim, silent city of tall black towers, and up
the steep eastward precipice to his own ancient door.
On regaining consciousness in the morning he found himself lying on his study
floor fully dressed. Dirt and cobwebs covered him, and every inch of his body
seemed sore and bruised. When he faced the mirror he saw that his hair was
badly scorched, while a trace of strange, evil odour seemed to cling to his
upper outer clothing. It was then that his nerves broke down. Thereafter,
lounging exhaustedly about in a dressing-gown, he did little but stare from his
west window, shiver at the threat of thunder, and make wild entries in his
diary.
The great storm broke just before midnight on August 8th. Lightning struck
repeatedly in all parts of the city, and two remarkable fireballs were
reported. The rain was torrential, while a constant fusillade of thunder
brought sleeplessness to thousands. Blake was utterly frantic in his fear for
the lighting system, and tried to telephone the company around 1 a.m., though
by that time service had been temporarily cut off in the interest of safety. He
recorded everything in his diary—the large, nervous, and often undecipherable
hieroglyphs telling their own story of growing frenzy and despair, and of
entries scrawled blindly in the dark.
He had to keep the house dark in order to see out the window, and it appears
that most of his time was spent at his desk, peering anxiously through the rain
across the glistening miles of downtown roofs at the constellation of distant
lights marking Federal Hill. Now and then he would fumblingly make an entry in
his diary, so that detached phrases such as “The lights must not go”; “It knows
where I am”; “I must destroy it”; and “It is calling to me, but perhaps it
means no injury this time”; are found scattered down two of the pages.
Then the lights went out all over the city. It happened at 2:12 a.m. according
to power-house records, but Blake’s diary gives no indication of the time. The
entry is merely, “Lights out—God help me.” On Federal Hill there were watchers
as anxious as he, and rain-soaked knots of men paraded the square and alleys
around the evil church with umbrella-shaded candles, electric flashlights, oil
lanterns, crucifixes, and obscure charms of the many sorts common to southern
Italy. They blessed each flash of lightning, and made cryptical signs of fear
with their right hands when a turn in the storm caused the flashes to lessen
and finally to cease altogether. A rising wind blew out most of the candles, so
that the scene grew threateningly dark. Someone roused Father Merluzzo of
Spirito Santo Church, and he hastened to the dismal square to pronounce
whatever helpful syllables he could. Of the restless and curious sounds in the
blackened tower, there could be no doubt whatever.
For what happened at 2:35 we have the testimony of the priest, a young,
intelligent, and well-educated person; of Patrolman William J. Monahan of the
Central Station, an officer of the highest reliability who had paused at that
part of his beat to inspect the crowd; and of most of the seventy-eight men who
had gathered around the church’s high bank wall—especially those in the square
where the eastward facade was visible. Of course there was nothing which can be
proved as being outside the order of Nature. The possible causes of such an
event are many. No one can speak with certainty of the obscure chemical
processes arising in a vast, ancient, ill-aired, and long-deserted building of
heterogeneous contents. Mephitic vapours—spontaneous combustion—pressure of
gases born of long decay—any one of numberless phenomena might be responsible.
And then, of course, the factor of conscious charlatanry can by no means be
excluded. The thing was really quite simple in itself, and covered less than
three minutes of actual time. Father Merluzzo, always a precise man, looked at
his watch repeatedly.
It started with a definite swelling of the dull fumbling sounds inside the
black tower. There had for some time been a vague exhalation of strange, evil
odours from the church, and this had now become emphatic and offensive. Then at
last there was a sound of splintering wood, and a large, heavy object crashed
down in the yard beneath the frowning easterly facade. The tower was invisible
now that the candles would not burn, but as the object neared the ground the
people knew that it was the smoke-grimed louver-boarding of that tower’s east
window.
Immediately afterward an utterly unbearable foetor welled forth from the unseen
heights, choking and sickening the trembling watchers, and almost prostrating
those in the square. At the same time the air trembled with a vibration as of
flapping wings, and a sudden east-blowing wind more violent than any previous
blast snatched off the hats and wrenched the dripping umbrellas of the crowd.
Nothing definite could be seen in the candleless night, though some
upward-looking spectators thought they glimpsed a great spreading blur of
denser blackness against the inky sky—something like a formless cloud of smoke
that shot with meteor-like speed toward the east.
That was all. The watchers were half numbed with fright, awe, and discomfort,
and scarcely knew what to do, or whether to do anything at all. Not knowing
what had happened, they did not relax their vigil; and a moment later they sent
up a prayer as a sharp flash of belated lightning, followed by an earsplitting
crash of sound, rent the flooded heavens. Half an hour later the rain stopped,
and in fifteen minutes more the street-lights sprang on again, sending the
weary, bedraggled watchers relievedly back to their homes.
The next day’s papers gave these matters minor mention in connexion with the
general storm reports. It seems that the great lightning flash and deafening
explosion which followed the Federal Hill occurrence were even more tremendous
farther east, where a burst of the singular foetor was likewise noticed. The
phenomenon was most marked over College Hill, where the crash awaked all the
sleeping inhabitants and led to a bewildered round of speculations. Of those
who were already awake only a few saw the anomalous blaze of light near the top
of the hill, or noticed the inexplicable upward rush of air which almost
stripped the leaves from the trees and blasted the plants in the gardens. It
was agreed that the lone, sudden lightning-bolt must have struck somewhere in
this neighbourhood, though no trace of its striking could afterward be found. A
youth in the Tau Omega fraternity house thought he saw a grotesque and hideous
mass of smoke in the air just as the preliminary flash burst, but his
observation has not been verified. All of the few observers, however, agree as
to the violent gust from the west and the flood of intolerable stench which
preceded the belated stroke; whilst evidence concerning the momentary burned
odour after the stroke is equally general.
These points were discussed very carefully because of their probable connexion
with the death of Robert Blake. Students in the Psi Delta house, whose upper
rear windows looked into Blake’s study, noticed the blurred white face at the
westward window on the morning of the 9th, and wondered what was wrong with the
expression. When they saw the same face in the same position that evening, they
felt worried, and watched for the lights to come up in his apartment. Later
they rang the bell of the darkened flat, and finally had a policeman force the
door.
The rigid body sat bolt upright at the desk by the window, and when the
intruders saw the glassy, bulging eyes, and the marks of stark, convulsive
fright on the twisted features, they turned away in sickened dismay. Shortly
afterward the coroner’s physician made an examination, and despite the unbroken
window reported electrical shock, or nervous tension induced by electrical
discharge, as the cause of death. The hideous expression he ignored altogether,
deeming it a not improbable result of the profound shock as experienced by a
person of such abnormal imagination and unbalanced emotions. He deduced these
latter qualities from the books, paintings, and manuscripts found in the
apartment, and from the blindly scrawled entries in the diary on the desk.
Blake had prolonged his frenzied jottings to the last, and the broken-pointed
pencil was found clutched in his spasmodically contracted right hand.
The entries after the failure of the lights were highly disjointed, and legible
only in part. From them certain investigators have drawn conclusions differing
greatly from the materialistic official verdict, but such speculations have
little chance for belief among the conservative. The case of these imaginative
theorists has not been helped by the action of superstitious Dr. Dexter, who
threw the curious box and angled stone—an object certainly self-luminous as
seen in the black windowless steeple where it was found—into the deepest
channel of Narragansett Bay. Excessive imagination and neurotic unbalance on
Blake’s part, aggravated by knowledge of the evil bygone cult whose startling
traces he had uncovered, form the dominant interpretation given those final
frenzied jottings. These are the entries—or all that can be made of them.

    “Lights still out—must be five minutes now. Everything depends on
lightning. Yaddith grant it will keep up! . . . Some influence seems beating
through it. . . . Rain and thunder and wind deafen. . . . The thing is taking
hold of my mind. . . .
    “Trouble with memory. I see things I never knew before. Other worlds and
other galaxies . . . Dark . . . The lightning seems dark and the darkness seems
light. . . .
    “It cannot be the real hill and church that I see in the pitch-darkness.
Must be retinal impression left by flashes. Heaven grant the Italians are out
with their candles if the lightning stops!
    “What am I afraid of? Is it not an avatar of Nyarlathotep, who in antique
and shadowy Khem even took the form of man? I remember Yuggoth, and more
distant Shaggai, and the ultimate void of the black planets. . . .
    “The long, winging flight through the void . . . cannot cross the universe
of light . . . re-created by the thoughts caught in the Shining Trapezohedron .
. . send it through the horrible abysses of radiance. . . .
    “My name is Blake—Robert Harrison Blake of 620 East Knapp Street,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin. . . . I am on this planet. . . .
    “Azathoth have mercy!—the lightning no longer flashes—horrible—I can see
everything with a monstrous sense that is not sight—light is dark and dark is
light . . . those people on the hill . . . guard . . . candles and charms . . .
their priests. . . .
    “Sense of distance gone—far is near and near is far. No light—no glass—see
that steeple—that tower—window—can hear—Roderick Usher—am mad or going mad—the
thing is stirring and fumbling in the tower—I am it and it is I—I want to get
out . . . must get out and unify the forces. . . . It knows where I am. . . .
    “I am Robert Blake, but I see the tower in the dark. There is a monstrous
odour . . . senses transfigured . . . boarding at that tower window cracking
and giving way. . . . Iä . . . ngai . . . ygg. . . .
    “I see it—coming here—hell-wind—titan blur—black wings—Yog-Sothoth save
me—the three-lobed burning eye. . . .”

    “Of such great powers or beings there may be conceivably a survival . . . a
survival of a hugely remote period when . . . consciousness was manifested,
perhaps, in shapes and forms long since withdrawn before the tide of advancing
humanity . . . forms of which poetry and legend alone have caught a flying
memory and called them gods, monsters, mythical beings of all sorts and kinds.
. . .”
    —Algernon Blackwood.

I.
The Horror in Clay.

The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the human
mind to correlate all its contents. We live on a placid island of ignorance in
the midst of black seas of infinity, and it was not meant that we should voyage
far. The sciences, each straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us
little; but some day the piecing together of dissociated knowledge will open up
such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our frightful position therein, that
we shall either go mad from the revelation or flee from the deadly light into
the peace and safety of a new dark age.
Theosophists have guessed at the awesome grandeur of the cosmic cycle wherein
our world and human race form transient incidents. They have hinted at strange
survivals in terms which would freeze the blood if not masked by a bland
optimism. But it is not from them that there came the single glimpse of
forbidden aeons which chills me when I think of it and maddens me when I dream
of it. That glimpse, like all dread glimpses of truth, flashed out from an
accidental piecing together of separated things—in this case an old newspaper
item and the notes of a dead professor. I hope that no one else will accomplish
this piecing out; certainly, if I live, I shall never knowingly supply a link
in so hideous a chain. I think that the professor, too, intended to keep silent
regarding the part he knew, and that he would have destroyed his notes had not
sudden death seized him.
My knowledge of the thing began in the winter of 1926–27 with the death of my
grand-uncle George Gammell Angell, Professor Emeritus of Semitic Languages in
Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island. Professor Angell was widely known
as an authority on ancient inscriptions, and had frequently been resorted to by
the heads of prominent museums; so that his passing at the age of ninety-two
may be recalled by many. Locally, interest was intensified by the obscurity of
the cause of death. The professor had been stricken whilst returning from the
Newport boat; falling suddenly, as witnesses said, after having been jostled by
a nautical-looking negro who had come from one of the queer dark courts on the
precipitous hillside which formed a short cut from the waterfront to the
deceased’s home in Williams Street. Physicians were unable to find any visible
disorder, but concluded after perplexed debate that some obscure lesion of the
heart, induced by the brisk ascent of so steep a hill by so elderly a man, was
responsible for the end. At the time I saw no reason to dissent from this
dictum, but latterly I am inclined to wonder—and more than wonder.
As my grand-uncle’s heir and executor, for he died a childless widower, I was
expected to go over his papers with some thoroughness; and for that purpose
moved his entire set of files and boxes to my quarters in Boston. Much of the
material which I correlated will be later published by the American
Archaeological Society, but there was one box which I found exceedingly
puzzling, and which I felt much averse from shewing to other eyes. It had been
locked, and I did not find the key till it occurred to me to examine the
personal ring which the professor carried always in his pocket. Then indeed I
succeeded in opening it, but when I did so seemed only to be confronted by a
greater and more closely locked barrier. For what could be the meaning of the
queer clay bas-relief and the disjointed jottings, ramblings, and cuttings
which I found? Had my uncle, in his latter years, become credulous of the most
superficial impostures? I resolved to search out the eccentric sculptor
responsible for this apparent disturbance of an old man’s peace of mind.
The bas-relief was a rough rectangle less than an inch thick and about five by
six inches in area; obviously of modern origin. Its designs, however, were far
from modern in atmosphere and suggestion; for although the vagaries of cubism
and futurism are many and wild, they do not often reproduce that cryptic
regularity which lurks in prehistoric writing. And writing of some kind the
bulk of these designs seemed certainly to be; though my memory, despite much
familiarity with the papers and collections of my uncle, failed in any way to
identify this particular species, or even to hint at its remotest affiliations.
Above these apparent hieroglyphics was a figure of evidently pictorial intent,
though its impressionistic execution forbade a very clear idea of its nature.
It seemed to be a sort of monster, or symbol representing a monster, of a form
which only a diseased fancy could conceive. If I say that my somewhat
extravagant imagination yielded simultaneous pictures of an octopus, a dragon,
and a human caricature, I shall not be unfaithful to the spirit of the thing. A
pulpy, tentacled head surmounted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentary
wings; but it was the general outline of the whole which made it most
shockingly frightful. Behind the figure was a vague suggestion of a Cyclopean
architectural background.
The writing accompanying this oddity was, aside from a stack of press cuttings,
in Professor Angell’s most recent hand; and made no pretence to literary style.
What seemed to be the main document was headed “CTHULHU CULT” in characters
painstakingly printed to avoid the erroneous reading of a word so unheard-of.
The manuscript was divided into two sections, the first of which was headed
“1925—Dream and Dream Work of H. A. Wilcox, 7 Thomas St., Providence, R.I.”,
and the second, “Narrative of Inspector John R. Legrasse, 121 Bienville St.,
New Orleans, La., at 1908 A. A. S. Mtg.—Notes on Same, & Prof. Webb’s Acct.”
The other manuscript papers were all brief notes, some of them accounts of the
queer dreams of different persons, some of them citations from theosophical
books and magazines (notably W. Scott-Elliot’s Atlantis and the Lost Lemuria),
and the rest comments on long-surviving secret societies and hidden cults, with
references to passages in such mythological and anthropological source-books as
Frazer’s Golden Bough and Miss Murray’s Witch-Cult in Western Europe. The
cuttings largely alluded to outré mental illnesses and outbreaks of group folly
or mania in the spring of 1925.
The first half of the principal manuscript told a very peculiar tale. It
appears that on March 1st, 1925, a thin, dark young man of neurotic and excited
aspect had called upon Professor Angell bearing the singular clay bas-relief,
which was then exceedingly damp and fresh. His card bore the name of Henry
Anthony Wilcox, and my uncle had recognised him as the youngest son of an
excellent family slightly known to him, who had latterly been studying
sculpture at the Rhode Island School of Design and living alone at the
Fleur-de-Lys Building near that institution. Wilcox was a precocious youth of
known genius but great eccentricity, and had from childhood excited attention
through the strange stories and odd dreams he was in the habit of relating. He
called himself “psychically hypersensitive”, but the staid folk of the ancient
commercial city dismissed him as merely “queer”. Never mingling much with his
kind, he had dropped gradually from social visibility, and was now known only
to a small group of aesthetes from other towns. Even the Providence Art Club,
anxious to preserve its conservatism, had found him quite hopeless.
On the occasion of the visit, ran the professor’s manuscript, the sculptor
abruptly asked for the benefit of his host’s archaeological knowledge in
identifying the hieroglyphics on the bas-relief. He spoke in a dreamy, stilted
manner which suggested pose and alienated sympathy; and my uncle shewed some
sharpness in replying, for the conspicuous freshness of the tablet implied
kinship with anything but archaeology. Young Wilcox’s rejoinder, which
impressed my uncle enough to make him recall and record it verbatim, was of a
fantastically poetic cast which must have typified his whole conversation, and
which I have since found highly characteristic of him. He said, “It is new,
indeed, for I made it last night in a dream of strange cities; and dreams are
older than brooding Tyre, or the contemplative Sphinx, or garden-girdled
Babylon.”
It was then that he began that rambling tale which suddenly played upon a
sleeping memory and won the fevered interest of my uncle. There had been a
slight earthquake tremor the night before, the most considerable felt in New
England for some years; and Wilcox’s imagination had been keenly affected. Upon
retiring, he had had an unprecedented dream of great Cyclopean cities of titan
blocks and sky-flung monoliths, all dripping with green ooze and sinister with
latent horror. Hieroglyphics had covered the walls and pillars, and from some
undetermined point below had come a voice that was not a voice; a chaotic
sensation which only fancy could transmute into sound, but which he attempted
to render by the almost unpronounceable jumble of letters, “Cthulhu fhtagn”.
This verbal jumble was the key to the recollection which excited and disturbed
Professor Angell. He questioned the sculptor with scientific minuteness; and
studied with almost frantic intensity the bas-relief on which the youth had
found himself working, chilled and clad only in his night-clothes, when waking
had stolen bewilderingly over him. My uncle blamed his old age, Wilcox
afterward said, for his slowness in recognising both hieroglyphics and
pictorial design. Many of his questions seemed highly out-of-place to his
visitor, especially those which tried to connect the latter with strange cults
or societies; and Wilcox could not understand the repeated promises of silence
which he was offered in exchange for an admission of membership in some
widespread mystical or paganly religious body. When Professor Angell became
convinced that the sculptor was indeed ignorant of any cult or system of
cryptic lore, he besieged his visitor with demands for future reports of
dreams. This bore regular fruit, for after the first interview the manuscript
records daily calls of the young man, during which he related startling
fragments of nocturnal imagery whose burden was always some terrible Cyclopean
vista of dark and dripping stone, with a subterrene voice or intelligence
shouting monotonously in enigmatical sense-impacts uninscribable save as
gibberish. The two sounds most frequently repeated are those rendered by the
letters “Cthulhu” and “R’lyeh”.
On March 23d, the manuscript continued, Wilcox failed to appear; and inquiries
at his quarters revealed that he had been stricken with an obscure sort of
fever and taken to the home of his family in Waterman Street. He had cried out
in the night, arousing several other artists in the building, and had
manifested since then only alternations of unconsciousness and delirium. My
uncle at once telephoned the family, and from that time forward kept close
watch of the case; calling often at the Thayer Street office of Dr. Tobey, whom
he learned to be in charge. The youth’s febrile mind, apparently, was dwelling
on strange things; and the doctor shuddered now and then as he spoke of them.
They included not only a repetition of what he had formerly dreamed, but
touched wildly on a gigantic thing “miles high” which walked or lumbered about.
He at no time fully described this object, but occasional frantic words, as
repeated by Dr. Tobey, convinced the professor that it must be identical with
the nameless monstrosity he had sought to depict in his dream-sculpture.
Reference to this object, the doctor added, was invariably a prelude to the
young man’s subsidence into lethargy. His temperature, oddly enough, was not
greatly above normal; but his whole condition was otherwise such as to suggest
true fever rather than mental disorder.
On April 2nd at about 3 p.m. every trace of Wilcox’s malady suddenly ceased. He
sat upright in bed, astonished to find himself at home and completely ignorant
of what had happened in dream or reality since the night of March 22nd.
Pronounced well by his physician, he returned to his quarters in three days;
but to Professor Angell he was of no further assistance. All traces of strange
dreaming had vanished with his recovery, and my uncle kept no record of his
night-thoughts after a week of pointless and irrelevant accounts of thoroughly
usual visions.
Here the first part of the manuscript ended, but references to certain of the
scattered notes gave me much material for thought—so much, in fact, that only
the ingrained scepticism then forming my philosophy can account for my
continued distrust of the artist. The notes in question were those descriptive
of the dreams of various persons covering the same period as that in which
young Wilcox had had his strange visitations. My uncle, it seems, had quickly
instituted a prodigiously far-flung body of inquiries amongst nearly all the
friends whom he could question without impertinence, asking for nightly reports
of their dreams, and the dates of any notable visions for some time past. The
reception of his request seems to have been varied; but he must, at the very
least, have received more responses than any ordinary man could have handled
without a secretary. This original correspondence was not preserved, but his
notes formed a thorough and really significant digest. Average people in
society and business—New England’s traditional “salt of the earth”—gave an
almost completely negative result, though scattered cases of uneasy but
formless nocturnal impressions appear here and there, always between March 23d
and April 2nd—the period of young Wilcox’s delirium. Scientific men were little
more affected, though four cases of vague description suggest fugitive glimpses
of strange landscapes, and in one case there is mentioned a dread of something
abnormal.
It was from the artists and poets that the pertinent answers came, and I know
that panic would have broken loose had they been able to compare notes. As it
was, lacking their original letters, I half suspected the compiler of having
asked leading questions, or of having edited the correspondence in
corroboration of what he had latently resolved to see. That is why I continued
to feel that Wilcox, somehow cognisant of the old data which my uncle had
possessed, had been imposing on the veteran scientist. These responses from
aesthetes told a disturbing tale. From February 28th to April 2nd a large
proportion of them had dreamed very bizarre things, the intensity of the dreams
being immeasurably the stronger during the period of the sculptor’s delirium.
Over a fourth of those who reported anything, reported scenes and half-sounds
not unlike those which Wilcox had described; and some of the dreamers confessed
acute fear of the gigantic nameless thing visible toward the last. One case,
which the note describes with emphasis, was very sad. The subject, a widely
known architect with leanings toward theosophy and occultism, went violently
insane on the date of young Wilcox’s seizure, and expired several months later
after incessant screamings to be saved from some escaped denizen of hell. Had
my uncle referred to these cases by name instead of merely by number, I should
have attempted some corroboration and personal investigation; but as it was, I
succeeded in tracing down only a few. All of these, however, bore out the notes
in full. I have often wondered if all the objects of the professor’s
questioning felt as puzzled as did this fraction. It is well that no
explanation shall ever reach them.
The press cuttings, as I have intimated, touched on cases of panic, mania, and
eccentricity during the given period. Professor Angell must have employed a
cutting bureau, for the number of extracts was tremendous and the sources
scattered throughout the globe. Here was a nocturnal suicide in London, where a
lone sleeper had leaped from a window after a shocking cry. Here likewise a
rambling letter to the editor of a paper in South America, where a fanatic
deduces a dire future from visions he has seen. A despatch from California
describes a theosophist colony as donning white robes en masse for some
“glorious fulfilment” which never arrives, whilst items from India speak
guardedly of serious native unrest toward the end of March. Voodoo orgies
multiply in Hayti, and African outposts report ominous mutterings. American
officers in the Philippines find certain tribes bothersome about this time, and
New York policemen are mobbed by hysterical Levantines on the night of March
22–23. The west of Ireland, too, is full of wild rumour and legendry, and a
fantastic painter named Ardois-Bonnot hangs a blasphemous “Dream Landscape” in
the Paris spring salon of 1926. And so numerous are the recorded troubles in
insane asylums, that only a miracle can have stopped the medical fraternity
from noting strange parallelisms and drawing mystified conclusions. A weird
bunch of cuttings, all told; and I can at this date scarcely envisage the
callous rationalism with which I set them aside. But I was then convinced that
young Wilcox had known of the older matters mentioned by the professor.

II.
The Tale of Inspector Legrasse.

The older matters which had made the sculptor’s dream and bas-relief so
significant to my uncle formed the subject of the second half of his long
manuscript. Once before, it appears, Professor Angell had seen the hellish
outlines of the nameless monstrosity, puzzled over the unknown hieroglyphics,
and heard the ominous syllables which can be rendered only as “Cthulhu”; and
all this in so stirring and horrible a connexion that it is small wonder he
pursued young Wilcox with queries and demands for data.
The earlier experience had come in 1908, seventeen years before, when the
American Archaeological Society held its annual meeting in St. Louis. Professor
Angell, as befitted one of his authority and attainments, had had a prominent
part in all the deliberations; and was one of the first to be approached by the
several outsiders who took advantage of the convocation to offer questions for
correct answering and problems for expert solution.
The chief of these outsiders, and in a short time the focus of interest for the
entire meeting, was a commonplace-looking middle-aged man who had travelled all
the way from New Orleans for certain special information unobtainable from any
local source. His name was John Raymond Legrasse, and he was by profession an
Inspector of Police. With him he bore the subject of his visit, a grotesque,
repulsive, and apparently very ancient stone statuette whose origin he was at a
loss to determine. It must not be fancied that Inspector Legrasse had the least
interest in archaeology. On the contrary, his wish for enlightenment was
prompted by purely professional considerations. The statuette, idol, fetish, or
whatever it was, had been captured some months before in the wooded swamps
south of New Orleans during a raid on a supposed voodoo meeting; and so
singular and hideous were the rites connected with it, that the police could
not but realise that they had stumbled on a dark cult totally unknown to them,
and infinitely more diabolic than even the blackest of the African voodoo
circles. Of its origin, apart from the erratic and unbelievable tales extorted
from the captured members, absolutely nothing was to be discovered; hence the
anxiety of the police for any antiquarian lore which might help them to place
the frightful symbol, and through it track down the cult to its fountain-head.
Inspector Legrasse was scarcely prepared for the sensation which his offering
created. One sight of the thing had been enough to throw the assembled men of
science into a state of tense excitement, and they lost no time in crowding
around him to gaze at the diminutive figure whose utter strangeness and air of
genuinely abysmal antiquity hinted so potently at unopened and archaic vistas.
No recognised school of sculpture had animated this terrible object, yet
centuries and even thousands of years seemed recorded in its dim and greenish
surface of unplaceable stone.
The figure, which was finally passed slowly from man to man for close and
careful study, was between seven and eight inches in height, and of exquisitely
artistic workmanship. It represented a monster of vaguely anthropoid outline,
but with an octopus-like head whose face was a mass of feelers, a scaly,
rubbery-looking body, prodigious claws on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow
wings behind. This thing, which seemed instinct with a fearsome and unnatural
malignancy, was of a somewhat bloated corpulence, and squatted evilly on a
rectangular block or pedestal covered with undecipherable characters. The tips
of the wings touched the back edge of the block, the seat occupied the centre,
whilst the long, curved claws of the doubled-up, crouching hind legs gripped
the front edge and extended a quarter of the way down toward the bottom of the
pedestal. The cephalopod head was bent forward, so that the ends of the facial
feelers brushed the backs of huge fore paws which clasped the croucher’s
elevated knees. The aspect of the whole was abnormally life-like, and the more
subtly fearful because its source was so totally unknown. Its vast, awesome,
and incalculable age was unmistakable; yet not one link did it shew with any
known type of art belonging to civilisation’s youth—or indeed to any other
time. Totally separate and apart, its very material was a mystery; for the
soapy, greenish-black stone with its golden or iridescent flecks and striations
resembled nothing familiar to geology or mineralogy. The characters along the
base were equally baffling; and no member present, despite a representation of
half the world’s expert learning in this field, could form the least notion of
even their remotest linguistic kinship. They, like the subject and material,
belonged to something horribly remote and distinct from mankind as we know it;
something frightfully suggestive of old and unhallowed cycles of life in which
our world and our conceptions have no part.
And yet, as the members severally shook their heads and confessed defeat at the
Inspector’s problem, there was one man in that gathering who suspected a touch
of bizarre familiarity in the monstrous shape and writing, and who presently
told with some diffidence of the odd trifle he knew. This person was the late
William Channing Webb, Professor of Anthropology in Princeton University, and
an explorer of no slight note. Professor Webb had been engaged, forty-eight
years before, in a tour of Greenland and Iceland in search of some Runic
inscriptions which he failed to unearth; and whilst high up on the West
Greenland coast had encountered a singular tribe or cult of degenerate
Esquimaux whose religion, a curious form of devil-worship, chilled him with its
deliberate bloodthirstiness and repulsiveness. It was a faith of which other
Esquimaux knew little, and which they mentioned only with shudders, saying that
it had come down from horribly ancient aeons before ever the world was made.
Besides nameless rites and human sacrifices there were certain queer hereditary
rituals addressed to a supreme elder devil or tornasuk; and of this Professor
Webb had taken a careful phonetic copy from an aged angekok or wizard-priest,
expressing the sounds in Roman letters as best he knew how. But just now of
prime significance was the fetish which this cult had cherished, and around
which they danced when the aurora leaped high over the ice cliffs. It was, the
professor stated, a very crude bas-relief of stone, comprising a hideous
picture and some cryptic writing. And so far as he could tell, it was a rough
parallel in all essential features of the bestial thing now lying before the
meeting.
This data, received with suspense and astonishment by the assembled members,
proved doubly exciting to Inspector Legrasse; and he began at once to ply his
informant with questions. Having noted and copied an oral ritual among the
swamp cult-worshippers his men had arrested, he besought the professor to
remember as best he might the syllables taken down amongst the diabolist
Esquimaux. There then followed an exhaustive comparison of details, and a
moment of really awed silence when both detective and scientist agreed on the
virtual identity of the phrase common to two hellish rituals so many worlds of
distance apart. What, in substance, both the Esquimau wizards and the Louisiana
swamp-priests had chanted to their kindred idols was something very like
this—the word-divisions being guessed at from traditional breaks in the phrase
as chanted aloud:
“Ph’nglui mglw’nafh Cthulhu R’lyeh wgah’nagl fhtagn.”
Legrasse had one point in advance of Professor Webb, for several among his
mongrel prisoners had repeated to him what older celebrants had told them the
words meant. This text, as given, ran something like this:
“In his house at R’lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.”
And now, in response to a general and urgent demand, Inspector Legrasse related
as fully as possible his experience with the swamp worshippers; telling a story
to which I could see my uncle attached profound significance. It savoured of
the wildest dreams of myth-maker and theosophist, and disclosed an astonishing
degree of cosmic imagination among such half-castes and pariahs as might be
least expected to possess it.
On November 1st, 1907, there had come to the New Orleans police a frantic
summons from the swamp and lagoon country to the south. The squatters there,
mostly primitive but good-natured descendants of Lafitte’s men, were in the
grip of stark terror from an unknown thing which had stolen upon them in the
night. It was voodoo, apparently, but voodoo of a more terrible sort than they
had ever known; and some of their women and children had disappeared since the
malevolent tom-tom had begun its incessant beating far within the black haunted
woods where no dweller ventured. There were insane shouts and harrowing
screams, soul-chilling chants and dancing devil-flames; and, the frightened
messenger added, the people could stand it no more.
So a body of twenty police, filling two carriages and an automobile, had set
out in the late afternoon with the shivering squatter as a guide. At the end of
the passable road they alighted, and for miles splashed on in silence through
the terrible cypress woods where day never came. Ugly roots and malignant
hanging nooses of Spanish moss beset them, and now and then a pile of dank
stones or fragment of a rotting wall intensified by its hint of morbid
habitation a depression which every malformed tree and every fungous islet
combined to create. At length the squatter settlement, a miserable huddle of
huts, hove in sight; and hysterical dwellers ran out to cluster around the
group of bobbing lanterns. The muffled beat of tom-toms was now faintly audible
far, far ahead; and a curdling shriek came at infrequent intervals when the
wind shifted. A reddish glare, too, seemed to filter through the pale
undergrowth beyond endless avenues of forest night. Reluctant even to be left
alone again, each one of the cowed squatters refused point-blank to advance
another inch toward the scene of unholy worship, so Inspector Legrasse and his
nineteen colleagues plunged on unguided into black arcades of horror that none
of them had ever trod before.
The region now entered by the police was one of traditionally evil repute,
substantially unknown and untraversed by white men. There were legends of a
hidden lake unglimpsed by mortal sight, in which dwelt a huge, formless white
polypous thing with luminous eyes; and squatters whispered that bat-winged
devils flew up out of caverns in inner earth to worship it at midnight. They
said it had been there before D’Iberville, before La Salle, before the Indians,
and before even the wholesome beasts and birds of the woods. It was nightmare
itself, and to see it was to die. But it made men dream, and so they knew
enough to keep away. The present voodoo orgy was, indeed, on the merest fringe
of this abhorred area, but that location was bad enough; hence perhaps the very
place of the worship had terrified the squatters more than the shocking sounds
and incidents.
Only poetry or madness could do justice to the noises heard by Legrasse’s men
as they ploughed on through the black morass toward the red glare and the
muffled tom-toms. There are vocal qualities peculiar to men, and vocal
qualities peculiar to beasts; and it is terrible to hear the one when the
source should yield the other. Animal fury and orgiastic licence here whipped
themselves to daemoniac heights by howls and squawking ecstasies that tore and
reverberated through those nighted woods like pestilential tempests from the
gulfs of hell. Now and then the less organised ululation would cease, and from
what seemed a well-drilled chorus of hoarse voices would rise in sing-song
chant that hideous phrase or ritual:
“Ph’nglui mglw’nafh Cthulhu R’lyeh wgah’nagl fhtagn.”
Then the men, having reached a spot where the trees were thinner, came suddenly
in sight of the spectacle itself. Four of them reeled, one fainted, and two
were shaken into a frantic cry which the mad cacophony of the orgy fortunately
deadened. Legrasse dashed swamp water on the face of the fainting man, and all
stood trembling and nearly hypnotised with horror.
In a natural glade of the swamp stood a grassy island of perhaps an acre’s
extent, clear of trees and tolerably dry. On this now leaped and twisted a more
indescribable horde of human abnormality than any but a Sime or an Angarola
could paint. Void of clothing, this hybrid spawn were braying, bellowing, and
writhing about a monstrous ring-shaped bonfire; in the centre of which,
revealed by occasional rifts in the curtain of flame, stood a great granite
monolith some eight feet in height; on top of which, incongruous with its
diminutiveness, rested the noxious carven statuette. From a wide circle of ten
scaffolds set up at regular intervals with the flame-girt monolith as a centre
hung, head downward, the oddly marred bodies of the helpless squatters who had
disappeared. It was inside this circle that the ring of worshippers jumped and
roared, the general direction of the mass motion being from left to right in
endless Bacchanal between the ring of bodies and the ring of fire.
It may have been only imagination and it may have been only echoes which
induced one of the men, an excitable Spaniard, to fancy he heard antiphonal
responses to the ritual from some far and unillumined spot deeper within the
wood of ancient legendry and horror. This man, Joseph D. Galvez, I later met
and questioned; and he proved distractingly imaginative. He indeed went so far
as to hint of the faint beating of great wings, and of a glimpse of shining
eyes and a mountainous white bulk beyond the remotest trees—but I suppose he
had been hearing too much native superstition.
Actually, the horrified pause of the men was of comparatively brief duration.
Duty came first; and although there must have been nearly a hundred mongrel
celebrants in the throng, the police relied on their firearms and plunged
determinedly into the nauseous rout. For five minutes the resultant din and
chaos were beyond description. Wild blows were struck, shots were fired, and
escapes were made; but in the end Legrasse was able to count some forty-seven
sullen prisoners, whom he forced to dress in haste and fall into line between
two rows of policemen. Five of the worshippers lay dead, and two severely
wounded ones were carried away on improvised stretchers by their
fellow-prisoners. The image on the monolith, of course, was carefully removed
and carried back by Legrasse.
Examined at headquarters after a trip of intense strain and weariness, the
prisoners all proved to be men of a very low, mixed-blooded, and mentally
aberrant type. Most were seamen, and a sprinkling of negroes and mulattoes,
largely West Indians or Brava Portuguese from the Cape Verde Islands, gave a
colouring of voodooism to the heterogeneous cult. But before many questions
were asked, it became manifest that something far deeper and older than negro
fetichism was involved. Degraded and ignorant as they were, the creatures held
with surprising consistency to the central idea of their loathsome faith.
They worshipped, so they said, the Great Old Ones who lived ages before there
were any men, and who came to the young world out of the sky. Those Old Ones
were gone now, inside the earth and under the sea; but their dead bodies had
told their secrets in dreams to the first men, who formed a cult which had
never died. This was that cult, and the prisoners said it had always existed
and always would exist, hidden in distant wastes and dark places all over the
world until the time when the great priest Cthulhu, from his dark house in the
mighty city of R’lyeh under the waters, should rise and bring the earth again
beneath his sway. Some day he would call, when the stars were ready, and the
secret cult would always be waiting to liberate him.
Meanwhile no more must be told. There was a secret which even torture could not
extract. Mankind was not absolutely alone among the conscious things of earth,
for shapes came out of the dark to visit the faithful few. But these were not
the Great Old Ones. No man had ever seen the Old Ones. The carven idol was
great Cthulhu, but none might say whether or not the others were precisely like
him. No one could read the old writing now, but things were told by word of
mouth. The chanted ritual was not the secret—that was never spoken aloud, only
whispered. The chant meant only this: “In his house at R’lyeh dead Cthulhu
waits dreaming.”
Only two of the prisoners were found sane enough to be hanged, and the rest
were committed to various institutions. All denied a part in the ritual
murders, and averred that the killing had been done by Black Winged Ones which
had come to them from their immemorial meeting-place in the haunted wood. But
of those mysterious allies no coherent account could ever be gained. What the
police did extract, came mainly from an immensely aged mestizo named Castro,
who claimed to have sailed to strange ports and talked with undying leaders of
the cult in the mountains of China.
Old Castro remembered bits of hideous legend that paled the speculations of
theosophists and made man and the world seem recent and transient indeed. There
had been aeons when other Things ruled on the earth, and They had had great
cities. Remains of Them, he said the deathless Chinamen had told him, were
still to be found as Cyclopean stones on islands in the Pacific. They all died
vast epochs of time before men came, but there were arts which could revive
Them when the stars had come round again to the right positions in the cycle of
eternity. They had, indeed, come themselves from the stars, and brought Their
images with Them.
These Great Old Ones, Castro continued, were not composed altogether of flesh
and blood. They had shape—for did not this star-fashioned image prove it?—but
that shape was not made of matter. When the stars were right, They could plunge
from world to world through the sky; but when the stars were wrong, They could
not live. But although They no longer lived, They would never really die. They
all lay in stone houses in Their great city of R’lyeh, preserved by the spells
of mighty Cthulhu for a glorious resurrection when the stars and the earth
might once more be ready for Them. But at that time some force from outside
must serve to liberate Their bodies. The spells that preserved Them intact
likewise prevented Them from making an initial move, and They could only lie
awake in the dark and think whilst uncounted millions of years rolled by. They
knew all that was occurring in the universe, but Their mode of speech was
transmitted thought. Even now They talked in Their tombs. When, after
infinities of chaos, the first men came, the Great Old Ones spoke to the
sensitive among them by moulding their dreams; for only thus could Their
language reach the fleshly minds of mammals.
Then, whispered Castro, those first men formed the cult around small idols
which the Great Ones shewed them; idols brought in dim aeras from dark stars.
That cult would never die till the stars came right again, and the secret
priests would take great Cthulhu from His tomb to revive His subjects and
resume His rule of earth. The time would be easy to know, for then mankind
would have become as the Great Old Ones; free and wild and beyond good and
evil, with laws and morals thrown aside and all men shouting and killing and
revelling in joy. Then the liberated Old Ones would teach them new ways to
shout and kill and revel and enjoy themselves, and all the earth would flame
with a holocaust of ecstasy and freedom. Meanwhile the cult, by appropriate
rites, must keep alive the memory of those ancient ways and shadow forth the
prophecy of their return.
In the elder time chosen men had talked with the entombed Old Ones in dreams,
but then something had happened. The great stone city R’lyeh, with its
monoliths and sepulchres, had sunk beneath the waves; and the deep waters, full
of the one primal mystery through which not even thought can pass, had cut off
the spectral intercourse. But memory never died, and high-priests said that the
city would rise again when the stars were right. Then came out of the earth the
black spirits of earth, mouldy and shadowy, and full of dim rumours picked up
in caverns beneath forgotten sea-bottoms. But of them old Castro dared not
speak much. He cut himself off hurriedly, and no amount of persuasion or
subtlety could elicit more in this direction. The size of the Old Ones, too, he
curiously declined to mention. Of the cult, he said that he thought the centre
lay amid the pathless deserts of Arabia, where Irem, the City of Pillars,
dreams hidden and untouched. It was not allied to the European witch-cult, and
was virtually unknown beyond its members. No book had ever really hinted of it,
though the deathless Chinamen said that there were double meanings in the
Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred which the initiated might read as
they chose, especially the much-discussed couplet:

“That is not dead which can eternal lie,
And with strange aeons even death may die.”

Legrasse, deeply impressed and not a little bewildered, had inquired in vain
concerning the historic affiliations of the cult. Castro, apparently, had told
the truth when he said that it was wholly secret. The authorities at Tulane
University could shed no light upon either cult or image, and now the detective
had come to the highest authorities in the country and met with no more than
the Greenland tale of Professor Webb.
The feverish interest aroused at the meeting by Legrasse’s tale, corroborated
as it was by the statuette, is echoed in the subsequent correspondence of those
who attended; although scant mention occurs in the formal publications of the
society. Caution is the first care of those accustomed to face occasional
charlatanry and imposture. Legrasse for some time lent the image to Professor
Webb, but at the latter’s death it was returned to him and remains in his
possession, where I viewed it not long ago. It is truly a terrible thing, and
unmistakably akin to the dream-sculpture of young Wilcox.
That my uncle was excited by the tale of the sculptor I did not wonder, for
what thoughts must arise upon hearing, after a knowledge of what Legrasse had
learned of the cult, of a sensitive young man who had dreamed not only the
figure and exact hieroglyphics of the swamp-found image and the Greenland devil
tablet, but had come in his dreams upon at least three of the precise words of
the formula uttered alike by Esquimau diabolists and mongrel Louisianans?
Professor Angell’s instant start on an investigation of the utmost thoroughness
was eminently natural; though privately I suspected young Wilcox of having
heard of the cult in some indirect way, and of having invented a series of
dreams to heighten and continue the mystery at my uncle’s expense. The
dream-narratives and cuttings collected by the professor were, of course,
strong corroboration; but the rationalism of my mind and the extravagance of
the whole subject led me to adopt what I thought the most sensible conclusions.
So, after thoroughly studying the manuscript again and correlating the
theosophical and anthropological notes with the cult narrative of Legrasse, I
made a trip to Providence to see the sculptor and give him the rebuke I thought
proper for so boldly imposing upon a learned and aged man.
Wilcox still lived alone in the Fleur-de-Lys Building in Thomas Street, a
hideous Victorian imitation of seventeenth-century Breton architecture which
flaunts its stuccoed front amidst the lovely colonial houses on the ancient
hill, and under the very shadow of the finest Georgian steeple in America. I
found him at work in his rooms, and at once conceded from the specimens
scattered about that his genius is indeed profound and authentic. He will, I
believe, some time be heard from as one of the great decadents; for he has
crystallised in clay and will one day mirror in marble those nightmares and
phantasies which Arthur Machen evokes in prose, and Clark Ashton Smith makes
visible in verse and in painting.
Dark, frail, and somewhat unkempt in aspect, he turned languidly at my knock
and asked me my business without rising. When I told him who I was, he
displayed some interest; for my uncle had excited his curiosity in probing his
strange dreams, yet had never explained the reason for the study. I did not
enlarge his knowledge in this regard, but sought with some subtlety to draw him
out. In a short time I became convinced of his absolute sincerity, for he spoke
of the dreams in a manner none could mistake. They and their subconscious
residuum had influenced his art profoundly, and he shewed me a morbid statue
whose contours almost made me shake with the potency of its black suggestion.
He could not recall having seen the original of this thing except in his own
dream bas-relief, but the outlines had formed themselves insensibly under his
hands. It was, no doubt, the giant shape he had raved of in delirium. That he
really knew nothing of the hidden cult, save from what my uncle’s relentless
catechism had let fall, he soon made clear; and again I strove to think of some
way in which he could possibly have received the weird impressions.
He talked of his dreams in a strangely poetic fashion; making me see with
terrible vividness the damp Cyclopean city of slimy green stone—whose geometry,
he oddly said, was all wrong—and hear with frightened expectancy the ceaseless,
half-mental calling from underground: “Cthulhu fhtagn”, “Cthulhu fhtagn”. These
words had formed part of that dread ritual which told of dead Cthulhu’s
dream-vigil in his stone vault at R’lyeh, and I felt deeply moved despite my
rational beliefs. Wilcox, I was sure, had heard of the cult in some casual way,
and had soon forgotten it amidst the mass of his equally weird reading and
imagining. Later, by virtue of its sheer impressiveness, it had found
subconscious expression in dreams, in the bas-relief, and in the terrible
statue I now beheld; so that his imposture upon my uncle had been a very
innocent one. The youth was of a type, at once slightly affected and slightly
ill-mannered, which I could never like; but I was willing enough now to admit
both his genius and his honesty. I took leave of him amicably, and wish him all
the success his talent promises.
The matter of the cult still remained to fascinate me, and at times I had
visions of personal fame from researches into its origin and connexions. I
visited New Orleans, talked with Legrasse and others of that old-time
raiding-party, saw the frightful image, and even questioned such of the mongrel
prisoners as still survived. Old Castro, unfortunately, had been dead for some
years. What I now heard so graphically at first-hand, though it was really no
more than a detailed confirmation of what my uncle had written, excited me
afresh; for I felt sure that I was on the track of a very real, very secret,
and very ancient religion whose discovery would make me an anthropologist of
note. My attitude was still one of absolute materialism, as I wish it still
were, and I discounted with almost inexplicable perversity the coincidence of
the dream notes and odd cuttings collected by Professor Angell.
One thing I began to suspect, and which I now fear I know, is that my uncle’s
death was far from natural. He fell on a narrow hill street leading up from an
ancient waterfront swarming with foreign mongrels, after a careless push from a
negro sailor. I did not forget the mixed blood and marine pursuits of the
cult-members in Louisiana, and would not be surprised to learn of secret
methods and poison needles as ruthless and as anciently known as the cryptic
rites and beliefs. Legrasse and his men, it is true, have been let alone; but
in Norway a certain seaman who saw things is dead. Might not the deeper
inquiries of my uncle after encountering the sculptor’s data have come to
sinister ears? I think Professor Angell died because he knew too much, or
because he was likely to learn too much. Whether I shall go as he did remains
to be seen, for I have learned much now.

III.
The Madness from the Sea.

If heaven ever wishes to grant me a boon, it will be a total effacing of the
results of a mere chance which fixed my eye on a certain stray piece of
shelf-paper. It was nothing on which I would naturally have stumbled in the
course of my daily round, for it was an old number of an Australian journal,
the Sydney Bulletin for April 18, 1925. It had escaped even the cutting bureau
which had at the time of its issuance been avidly collecting material for my
uncle’s research.
I had largely given over my inquiries into what Professor Angell called the
“Cthulhu Cult”, and was visiting a learned friend in Paterson, New Jersey; the
curator of a local museum and a mineralogist of note. Examining one day the
reserve specimens roughly set on the storage shelves in a rear room of the
museum, my eye was caught by an odd picture in one of the old papers spread
beneath the stones. It was the Sydney Bulletin I have mentioned, for my friend
has wide affiliations in all conceivable foreign parts; and the picture was a
half-tone cut of a hideous stone image almost identical with that which
Legrasse had found in the swamp.
Eagerly clearing the sheet of its precious contents, I scanned the item in
detail; and was disappointed to find it of only moderate length. What it
suggested, however, was of portentous significance to my flagging quest; and I
carefully tore it out for immediate action. It read as follows:

    MYSTERY DERELICT FOUND AT SEA
    Vigilant Arrives With Helpless Armed New Zealand Yacht in Tow.
    One Survivor and Dead Man Found Aboard. Tale of
    Desperate Battle and Deaths at Sea.
    Rescued Seaman Refuses
    Particulars of Strange Experience.
    Odd Idol Found in His Possession. Inquiry
    to Follow.

    The Morrison Co.’s freighter Vigilant, bound from Valparaiso, arrived this
morning at its wharf in Darling Harbour, having in tow the battled and disabled
but heavily armed steam yacht Alert of Dunedin, N. Z., which was sighted April
12th in S. Latitude 34° 21′, W. Longitude 152° 17′ with one living and one dead
man aboard.
    The Vigilant left Valparaiso March 25th, and on April 2nd was driven
considerably south of her course by exceptionally heavy storms and monster
waves. On April 12th the derelict was sighted; and though apparently deserted,
was found upon boarding to contain one survivor in a half-delirious condition
and one man who had evidently been dead for more than a week. The living man
was clutching a horrible stone idol of unknown origin, about a foot in height,
regarding whose nature authorities at Sydney University, the Royal Society, and
the Museum in College Street all profess complete bafflement, and which the
survivor says he found in the cabin of the yacht, in a small carved shrine of
common pattern.
    This man, after recovering his senses, told an exceedingly strange story of
piracy and slaughter. He is Gustaf Johansen, a Norwegian of some intelligence,
and had been second mate of the two-masted schooner Emma of Auckland, which
sailed for Callao February 20th with a complement of eleven men. The Emma, he
says, was delayed and thrown widely south of her course by the great storm of
March 1st, and on March 22nd, in S. Latitude 49° 51′, W. Longitude 128° 34′,
encountered the Alert, manned by a queer and evil-looking crew of Kanakas and
half-castes. Being ordered peremptorily to turn back, Capt. Collins refused;
whereupon the strange crew began to fire savagely and without warning upon the
schooner with a peculiarly heavy battery of brass cannon forming part of the
yacht’s equipment. The Emma’s men shewed fight, says the survivor, and though
the schooner began to sink from shots beneath the waterline they managed to
heave alongside their enemy and board her, grappling with the savage crew on
the yacht’s deck, and being forced to kill them all, the number being slightly
superior, because of their particularly abhorrent and desperate though rather
clumsy mode of fighting.
    Three of the Emma’s men, including Capt. Collins and First Mate Green, were
killed; and the remaining eight under Second Mate Johansen proceeded to
navigate the captured yacht, going ahead in their original direction to see if
any reason for their ordering back had existed. The next day, it appears, they
raised and landed on a small island, although none is known to exist in that
part of the ocean; and six of the men somehow died ashore, though Johansen is
queerly reticent about this part of his story, and speaks only of their falling
into a rock chasm. Later, it seems, he and one companion boarded the yacht and
tried to manage her, but were beaten about by the storm of April 2nd. From that
time till his rescue on the 12th the man remembers little, and he does not even
recall when William Briden, his companion, died. Briden’s death reveals no
apparent cause, and was probably due to excitement or exposure. Cable advices
from Dunedin report that the Alert was well known there as an island trader,
and bore an evil reputation along the waterfront. It was owned by a curious
group of half-castes whose frequent meetings and night trips to the woods
attracted no little curiosity; and it had set sail in great haste just after
the storm and earth tremors of March 1st. Our Auckland correspondent gives the
Emma and her crew an excellent reputation, and Johansen is described as a sober
and worthy man. The admiralty will institute an inquiry on the whole matter
beginning tomorrow, at which every effort will be made to induce Johansen to
speak more freely than he has done hitherto.

This was all, together with the picture of the hellish image; but what a train
of ideas it started in my mind! Here were new treasuries of data on the Cthulhu
Cult, and evidence that it had strange interests at sea as well as on land.
What motive prompted the hybrid crew to order back the Emma as they sailed
about with their hideous idol? What was the unknown island on which six of the
Emma’s crew had died, and about which the mate Johansen was so secretive? What
had the vice-admiralty’s investigation brought out, and what was known of the
noxious cult in Dunedin? And most marvellous of all, what deep and more than
natural linkage of dates was this which gave a malign and now undeniable
significance to the various turns of events so carefully noted by my uncle?
March 1st—our February 28th according to the International Date Line—the
earthquake and storm had come. From Dunedin the Alert and her noisome crew had
darted eagerly forth as if imperiously summoned, and on the other side of the
earth poets and artists had begun to dream of a strange, dank Cyclopean city
whilst a young sculptor had moulded in his sleep the form of the dreaded
Cthulhu. March 23d the crew of the Emma landed on an unknown island and left
six men dead; and on that date the dreams of sensitive men assumed a heightened
vividness and darkened with dread of a giant monster’s malign pursuit, whilst
an architect had gone mad and a sculptor had lapsed suddenly into delirium! And
what of this storm of April 2nd—the date on which all dreams of the dank city
ceased, and Wilcox emerged unharmed from the bondage of strange fever? What of
all this—and of those hints of old Castro about the sunken, star-born Old Ones
and their coming reign; their faithful cult and their mastery of dreams? Was I
tottering on the brink of cosmic horrors beyond man’s power to bear? If so,
they must be horrors of the mind alone, for in some way the second of April had
put a stop to whatever monstrous menace had begun its siege of mankind’s soul.
That evening, after a day of hurried cabling and arranging, I bade my host
adieu and took a train for San Francisco. In less than a month I was in
Dunedin; where, however, I found that little was known of the strange
cult-members who had lingered in the old sea-taverns. Waterfront scum was far
too common for special mention; though there was vague talk about one inland
trip these mongrels had made, during which faint drumming and red flame were
noted on the distant hills. In Auckland I learned that Johansen had returned
with yellow hair turned white after a perfunctory and inconclusive questioning
at Sydney, and had thereafter sold his cottage in West Street and sailed with
his wife to his old home in Oslo. Of his stirring experience he would tell his
friends no more than he had told the admiralty officials, and all they could do
was to give me his Oslo address.
After that I went to Sydney and talked profitlessly with seamen and members of
the vice-admiralty court. I saw the Alert, now sold and in commercial use, at
Circular Quay in Sydney Cove, but gained nothing from its non-committal bulk.
The crouching image with its cuttlefish head, dragon body, scaly wings, and
hieroglyphed pedestal, was preserved in the Museum at Hyde Park; and I studied
it long and well, finding it a thing of balefully exquisite workmanship, and
with the same utter mystery, terrible antiquity, and unearthly strangeness of
material which I had noted in Legrasse’s smaller specimen. Geologists, the
curator told me, had found it a monstrous puzzle; for they vowed that the world
held no rock like it. Then I thought with a shudder of what old Castro had told
Legrasse about the primal Great Ones: “They had come from the stars, and had
brought Their images with Them.”
Shaken with such a mental revolution as I had never before known, I now
resolved to visit Mate Johansen in Oslo. Sailing for London, I reëmbarked at
once for the Norwegian capital; and one autumn day landed at the trim wharves
in the shadow of the Egeberg. Johansen’s address, I discovered, lay in the Old
Town of King Harold Haardrada, which kept alive the name of Oslo during all the
centuries that the greater city masqueraded as “Christiana”. I made the brief
trip by taxicab, and knocked with palpitant heart at the door of a neat and
ancient building with plastered front. A sad-faced woman in black answered my
summons, and I was stung with disappointment when she told me in halting
English that Gustaf Johansen was no more.
He had not survived his return, said his wife, for the doings at sea in 1925
had broken him. He had told her no more than he had told the public, but had
left a long manuscript—of “technical matters” as he said—written in English,
evidently in order to safeguard her from the peril of casual perusal. During a
walk through a narrow lane near the Gothenburg dock, a bundle of papers falling
from an attic window had knocked him down. Two Lascar sailors at once helped
him to his feet, but before the ambulance could reach him he was dead.
Physicians found no adequate cause for the end, and laid it to heart trouble
and a weakened constitution.
I now felt gnawing at my vitals that dark terror which will never leave me till
I, too, am at rest; “accidentally” or otherwise. Persuading the widow that my
connexion with her husband’s “technical matters” was sufficient to entitle me
to his manuscript, I bore the document away and began to read it on the London
boat. It was a simple, rambling thing—a naive sailor’s effort at a post-facto
diary—and strove to recall day by day that last awful voyage. I cannot attempt
to transcribe it verbatim in all its cloudiness and redundance, but I will tell
its gist enough to shew why the sound of the water against the vessel’s sides
became so unendurable to me that I stopped my ears with cotton.
Johansen, thank God, did not know quite all, even though he saw the city and
the Thing, but I shall never sleep calmly again when I think of the horrors
that lurk ceaselessly behind life in time and in space, and of those unhallowed
blasphemies from elder stars which dream beneath the sea, known and favoured by
a nightmare cult ready and eager to loose them on the world whenever another
earthquake shall heave their monstrous stone city again to the sun and air.
Johansen’s voyage had begun just as he told it to the vice-admiralty. The Emma,
in ballast, had cleared Auckland on February 20th, and had felt the full force
of that earthquake-born tempest which must have heaved up from the sea-bottom
the horrors that filled men’s dreams. Once more under control, the ship was
making good progress when held up by the Alert on March 22nd, and I could feel
the mate’s regret as he wrote of her bombardment and sinking. Of the swarthy
cult-fiends on the Alert he speaks with significant horror. There was some
peculiarly abominable quality about them which made their destruction seem
almost a duty, and Johansen shews ingenuous wonder at the charge of
ruthlessness brought against his party during the proceedings of the court of
inquiry. Then, driven ahead by curiosity in their captured yacht under
Johansen’s command, the men sight a great stone pillar sticking out of the sea,
and in S. Latitude 47° 9′, W. Longitude 126° 43′ come upon a coast-line of
mingled mud, ooze, and weedy Cyclopean masonry which can be nothing less than
the tangible substance of earth’s supreme terror—the nightmare corpse-city of
R’lyeh, that was built in measureless aeons behind history by the vast,
loathsome shapes that seeped down from the dark stars. There lay great Cthulhu
and his hordes, hidden in green slimy vaults and sending out at last, after
cycles incalculable, the thoughts that spread fear to the dreams of the
sensitive and called imperiously to the faithful to come on a pilgrimage of
liberation and restoration. All this Johansen did not suspect, but God knows he
soon saw enough!
I suppose that only a single mountain-top, the hideous monolith-crowned citadel
whereon great Cthulhu was buried, actually emerged from the waters. When I
think of the extent of all that may be brooding down there I almost wish to
kill myself forthwith. Johansen and his men were awed by the cosmic majesty of
this dripping Babylon of elder daemons, and must have guessed without guidance
that it was nothing of this or of any sane planet. Awe at the unbelievable size
of the greenish stone blocks, at the dizzying height of the great carven
monolith, and at the stupefying identity of the colossal statues and
bas-reliefs with the queer image found in the shrine on the Alert, is
poignantly visible in every line of the mate’s frightened description.
Without knowing what futurism is like, Johansen achieved something very close
to it when he spoke of the city; for instead of describing any definite
structure or building, he dwells only on broad impressions of vast angles and
stone surfaces—surfaces too great to belong to any thing right or proper for
this earth, and impious with horrible images and hieroglyphs. I mention his
talk about angles because it suggests something Wilcox had told me of his awful
dreams. He had said that the geometry of the dream-place he saw was abnormal,
non-Euclidean, and loathsomely redolent of spheres and dimensions apart from
ours. Now an unlettered seaman felt the same thing whilst gazing at the
terrible reality.
Johansen and his men landed at a sloping mud-bank on this monstrous Acropolis,
and clambered slipperily up over titan oozy blocks which could have been no
mortal staircase. The very sun of heaven seemed distorted when viewed through
the polarising miasma welling out from this sea-soaked perversion, and twisted
menace and suspense lurked leeringly in those crazily elusive angles of carven
rock where a second glance shewed concavity after the first shewed convexity.
Something very like fright had come over all the explorers before anything more
definite than rock and ooze and weed was seen. Each would have fled had he not
feared the scorn of the others, and it was only half-heartedly that they
searched—vainly, as it proved—for some portable souvenir to bear away.
It was Rodriguez the Portuguese who climbed up the foot of the monolith and
shouted of what he had found. The rest followed him, and looked curiously at
the immense carved door with the now familiar squid-dragon bas-relief. It was,
Johansen said, like a great barn-door; and they all felt that it was a door
because of the ornate lintel, threshold, and jambs around it, though they could
not decide whether it lay flat like a trap-door or slantwise like an outside
cellar-door. As Wilcox would have said, the geometry of the place was all
wrong. One could not be sure that the sea and the ground were horizontal, hence
the relative position of everything else seemed phantasmally variable.
Briden pushed at the stone in several places without result. Then Donovan felt
over it delicately around the edge, pressing each point separately as he went.
He climbed interminably along the grotesque stone moulding—that is, one would
call it climbing if the thing was not after all horizontal—and the men wondered
how any door in the universe could be so vast. Then, very softly and slowly,
the acre-great panel began to give inward at the top; and they saw that it was
balanced. Donovan slid or somehow propelled himself down or along the jamb and
rejoined his fellows, and everyone watched the queer recession of the
monstrously carven portal. In this phantasy of prismatic distortion it moved
anomalously in a diagonal way, so that all the rules of matter and perspective
seemed upset.
The aperture was black with a darkness almost material. That tenebrousness was
indeed a positive quality; for it obscured such parts of the inner walls as
ought to have been revealed, and actually burst forth like smoke from its
aeon-long imprisonment, visibly darkening the sun as it slunk away into the
shrunken and gibbous sky on flapping membraneous wings. The odour arising from
the newly opened depths was intolerable, and at length the quick-eared Hawkins
thought he heard a nasty, slopping sound down there. Everyone listened, and
everyone was listening still when It lumbered slobberingly into sight and
gropingly squeezed Its gelatinous green immensity through the black doorway
into the tainted outside air of that poison city of madness.
Poor Johansen’s handwriting almost gave out when he wrote of this. Of the six
men who never reached the ship, he thinks two perished of pure fright in that
accursed instant. The Thing cannot be described—there is no language for such
abysms of shrieking and immemorial lunacy, such eldritch contradictions of all
matter, force, and cosmic order. A mountain walked or stumbled. God! What
wonder that across the earth a great architect went mad, and poor Wilcox raved
with fever in that telepathic instant? The Thing of the idols, the green,
sticky spawn of the stars, had awaked to claim his own. The stars were right
again, and what an age-old cult had failed to do by design, a band of innocent
sailors had done by accident. After vigintillions of years great Cthulhu was
loose again, and ravening for delight.
Three men were swept up by the flabby claws before anybody turned. God rest
them, if there be any rest in the universe. They were Donovan, Guerrera, and
Ångstrom. Parker slipped as the other three were plunging frenziedly over
endless vistas of green-crusted rock to the boat, and Johansen swears he was
swallowed up by an angle of masonry which shouldn’t have been there; an angle
which was acute, but behaved as if it were obtuse. So only Briden and Johansen
reached the boat, and pulled desperately for the Alert as the mountainous
monstrosity flopped down the slimy stones and hesitated floundering at the edge
of the water.
Steam had not been suffered to go down entirely, despite the departure of all
hands for the shore; and it was the work of only a few moments of feverish
rushing up and down between wheel and engines to get the Alert under way.
Slowly, amidst the distorted horrors of that indescribable scene, she began to
churn the lethal waters; whilst on the masonry of that charnel shore that was
not of earth the titan Thing from the stars slavered and gibbered like
Polypheme cursing the fleeing ship of Odysseus. Then, bolder than the storied
Cyclops, great Cthulhu slid greasily into the water and began to pursue with
vast wave-raising strokes of cosmic potency. Briden looked back and went mad,
laughing shrilly as he kept on laughing at intervals till death found him one
night in the cabin whilst Johansen was wandering deliriously.
But Johansen had not given out yet. Knowing that the Thing could surely
overtake the Alert until steam was fully up, he resolved on a desperate chance;
and, setting the engine for full speed, ran lightning-like on deck and reversed
the wheel. There was a mighty eddying and foaming in the noisome brine, and as
the steam mounted higher and higher the brave Norwegian drove his vessel head
on against the pursuing jelly which rose above the unclean froth like the stern
of a daemon galleon. The awful squid-head with writhing feelers came nearly up
to the bowsprit of the sturdy yacht, but Johansen drove on relentlessly. There
was a bursting as of an exploding bladder, a slushy nastiness as of a cloven
sunfish, a stench as of a thousand opened graves, and a sound that the
chronicler would not put on paper. For an instant the ship was befouled by an
acrid and blinding green cloud, and then there was only a venomous seething
astern; where—God in heaven!—the scattered plasticity of that nameless
sky-spawn was nebulously recombining in its hateful original form, whilst its
distance widened every second as the Alert gained impetus from its mounting
steam.
That was all. After that Johansen only brooded over the idol in the cabin and
attended to a few matters of food for himself and the laughing maniac by his
side. He did not try to navigate after the first bold flight, for the reaction
had taken something out of his soul. Then came the storm of April 2nd, and a
gathering of the clouds about his consciousness. There is a sense of spectral
whirling through liquid gulfs of infinity, of dizzying rides through reeling
universes on a comet’s tail, and of hysterical plunges from the pit to the moon
and from the moon back again to the pit, all livened by a cachinnating chorus
of the distorted, hilarious elder gods and the green, bat-winged mocking imps
of Tartarus.
Out of that dream came rescue—the Vigilant, the vice-admiralty court, the
streets of Dunedin, and the long voyage back home to the old house by the
Egeberg. He could not tell—they would think him mad. He would write of what he
knew before death came, but his wife must not guess. Death would be a boon if
only it could blot out the memories.
That was the document I read, and now I have placed it in the tin box beside
the bas-relief and the papers of Professor Angell. With it shall go this record
of mine—this test of my own sanity, wherein is pieced together that which I
hope may never be pieced together again. I have looked upon all that the
universe has to hold of horror, and even the skies of spring and the flowers of
summer must ever afterward be poison to me. But I do not think my life will be
long. As my uncle went, as poor Johansen went, so I shall go. I know too much,
and the cult still lives.
Cthulhu still lives, too, I suppose, again in that chasm of stone which has
shielded him since the sun was young. His accursed city is sunken once more,
for the Vigilant sailed over the spot after the April storm; but his ministers
on earth still bellow and prance and slay around idol-capped monoliths in
lonely places. He must have been trapped by the sinking whilst within his black
abyss, or else the world would by now be screaming with fright and frenzy. Who
knows the end? What has risen may sink, and what has sunk may rise.
Loathsomeness waits and dreams in the deep, and decay spreads over the
tottering cities of men. A time will come—but I must not and cannot think! Let
me pray that, if I do not survive this manuscript, my executors may put caution
before audacity and see that it meets no other eye.

West of Arkham the hills rise wild, and there are valleys with deep woods that no axe has ever cut. There are dark narrow glens where the trees slope fantastically, and where thin brooklets trickle without ever having caught the glint of sunlight. On the gentler slopes there are farms, ancient and rocky, with squat, moss-coated cottages brooding eternally over old New England secrets in the lee of great ledges; but these are all vacant now, the wide chimneys crumbling and the shingled sides bulging perilously beneath low gambrel roofs.
The old folk have gone away, and foreigners do not like to live there. French-Canadians have tried it, Italians have tried it, and the Poles have come and departed. It is not because of anything that can be seen or heard or handled, but because of something that is imagined. The place is not good for the imagination, and does not bring restful dreams at night. It must be this which keeps the foreigners away, for old Ammi Pierce has never told them of anything he recalls from the strange days. Ammi, whose head has been a little queer for years, is the only one who still remains, or who ever talks of the strange days; and he dares to do this because his house is so near the open fields and the travelled roads around Arkham.
There was once a road over the hills and through the valleys, that ran straight where the blasted heath is now; but people ceased to use it and a new road was laid curving far toward the south. Traces of the old one can still be found amidst the weeds of a returning wilderness, and some of them will doubtless linger even when half the hollows are flooded for the new reservoir. Then the dark woods will be cut down and the blasted heath will slumber far below blue waters whose surface will mirror the sky and ripple in the sun. And the secrets of the strange days will be one with the deep’s secrets; one with the hidden lore of old ocean, and all the mystery of primal earth.
When I went into the hills and vales to survey for the new reservoir they told me the place was evil. They told me this in Arkham, and because that is a very old town full of witch legends I thought the evil must be something which grandams had whispered to children through centuries. The name “blasted heath” seemed to me very odd and theatrical, and I wondered how it had come into the folklore of a Puritan people. Then I saw that dark westward tangle of glens and slopes for myself, and ceased to wonder at anything besides its own elder mystery. It was morning when I saw it, but shadow lurked always there. The trees grew too thickly, and their trunks were too big for any healthy New England wood. There was too much silence in the dim alleys between them, and the floor was too soft with the dank moss and mattings of infinite years of decay.
In the open spaces, mostly along the line of the old road, there were little hillside farms; sometimes with all the buildings standing, sometimes with only one or two, and sometimes with only a lone chimney or fast-filling cellar. Weeds and briers reigned, and furtive wild things rustled in the undergrowth. Upon everything was a haze of restlessness and oppression; a touch of the unreal and the grotesque, as if some vital element of perspective or chiaroscuro were awry. I did not wonder that the foreigners would not stay, for this was no region to sleep in. It was too much like a landscape of Salvator Rosa; too much like some forbidden woodcut in a tale of terror.
But even all this was not so bad as the blasted heath. I knew it the moment I came upon it at the bottom of a spacious valley; for no other name could fit such a thing, or any other thing fit such a name. It was as if the poet had coined the phrase from having seen this one particular region. It must, I thought as I viewed it, be the outcome of a fire; but why had nothing new ever grown over those five acres of grey desolation that sprawled open to the sky like a great spot eaten by acid in the woods and fields? It lay largely to the north of the ancient road line, but encroached a little on the other side. I felt an odd reluctance about approaching, and did so at last only because my business took me through and past it. There was no vegetation of any kind on that broad expanse, but only a fine grey dust or ash which no wind seemed ever to blow about. The trees near it were sickly and stunted, and many dead trunks stood or lay rotting at the rim. As I walked hurriedly by I saw the tumbled bricks and stones of an old chimney and cellar on my right, and the yawning black maw of an abandoned well whose stagnant vapours played strange tricks with the hues of the sunlight. Even the long, dark woodland climb beyond seemed welcome in contrast, and I marvelled no more at the frightened whispers of Arkham people. There had been no house or ruin near; even in the old days the place must have been lonely and remote. And at twilight, dreading to repass that ominous spot, I walked circuitously back to the town by the curving road on the south. I vaguely wished some clouds would gather, for an odd timidity about the deep skyey voids above had crept into my soul.
In the evening I asked old people in Arkham about the blasted heath, and what was meant by that phrase “strange days” which so many evasively muttered. I could not, however, get any good answers, except that all the mystery was much more recent than I had dreamed. It was not a matter of old legendry at all, but something within the lifetime of those who spoke. It had happened in the ’eighties, and a family had disappeared or was killed. Speakers would not be exact; and because they all told me to pay no attention to old Ammi Pierce’s crazy tales, I sought him out the next morning, having heard that he lived alone in the ancient tottering cottage where the trees first begin to get very thick. It was a fearsomely archaic place, and had begun to exude the faint miasmal odour which clings about houses that have stood too long. Only with persistent knocking could I rouse the aged man, and when he shuffled timidly to the door I could tell he was not glad to see me. He was not so feeble as I had expected; but his eyes drooped in a curious way, and his unkempt clothing and white beard made him seem very worn and dismal. Not knowing just how he could best be launched on his tales, I feigned a matter of business; told him of my surveying, and asked vague questions about the district. He was far brighter and more educated than I had been led to think, and before I knew it had grasped quite as much of the subject as any man I had talked with in Arkham. He was not like other rustics I had known in the sections where reservoirs were to be. From him there were no protests at the miles of old wood and farmland to be blotted out, though perhaps there would have been had not his home lain outside the bounds of the future lake. Relief was all that he shewed; relief at the doom of the dark ancient valleys through which he had roamed all his life. They were better under water now—better under water since the strange days. And with this opening his husky voice sank low, while his body leaned forward and his right forefinger began to point shakily and impressively.
It was then that I heard the story, and as the rambling voice scraped and whispered on I shivered again and again despite the summer day. Often I had to recall the speaker from ramblings, piece out scientific points which he knew only by a fading parrot memory of professors’ talk, or bridge over gaps where his sense of logic and continuity broke down. When he was done I did not wonder that his mind had snapped a trifle, or that the folk of Arkham would not speak much of the blasted heath. I hurried back before sunset to my hotel, unwilling to have the stars come out above me in the open; and the next day returned to Boston to give up my position. I could not go into that dim chaos of old forest and slope again, or face another time that grey blasted heath where the black well yawned deep beside the tumbled bricks and stones. The reservoir will soon be built now, and all those elder secrets will be safe forever under watery fathoms. But even then I do not believe I would like to visit that country by night—at least, not when the sinister stars are out; and nothing could bribe me to drink the new city water of Arkham.
It all began, old Ammi said, with the meteorite. Before that time there had been no wild legends at all since the witch trials, and even then these western woods were not feared half so much as the small island in the Miskatonic where the devil held court beside a curious stone altar older than the Indians. These were not haunted woods, and their fantastic dusk was never terrible till the strange days. Then there had come that white noontide cloud, that string of explosions in the air, and that pillar of smoke from the valley far in the wood. And by night all Arkham had heard of the great rock that fell out of the sky and bedded itself in the ground beside the well at the Nahum Gardner place. That was the house which had stood where the blasted heath was to come—the trim white Nahum Gardner house amidst its fertile gardens and orchards.
Nahum had come to town to tell people about the stone, and had dropped in at Ammi Pierce’s on the way. Ammi was forty then, and all the queer things were fixed very strongly in his mind. He and his wife had gone with the three professors from Miskatonic University who hastened out the next morning to see the weird visitor from unknown stellar space, and had wondered why Nahum had called it so large the day before. It had shrunk, Nahum said as he pointed out the big brownish mound above the ripped earth and charred grass near the archaic well-sweep in his front yard; but the wise men answered that stones do not shrink. Its heat lingered persistently, and Nahum declared it had glowed faintly in the night. The professors tried it with a geologist’s hammer and found it was oddly soft. It was, in truth, so soft as to be almost plastic; and they gouged rather than chipped a specimen to take back to the college for testing. They took it in an old pail borrowed from Nahum’s kitchen, for even the small piece refused to grow cool. On the trip back they stopped at Ammi’s to rest, and seemed thoughtful when Mrs. Pierce remarked that the fragment was growing smaller and burning the bottom of the pail. Truly, it was not large, but perhaps they had taken less than they thought.
The day after that—all this was in June of ’82—the professors had trooped out again in a great excitement. As they passed Ammi’s they told him what queer things the specimen had done, and how it had faded wholly away when they put it in a glass beaker. The beaker had gone, too, and the wise men talked of the strange stone’s affinity for silicon. It had acted quite unbelievably in that well-ordered laboratory; doing nothing at all and shewing no occluded gases when heated on charcoal, being wholly negative in the borax bead, and soon proving itself absolutely non-volatile at any producible temperature, including that of the oxy-hydrogen blowpipe. On an anvil it appeared highly malleable, and in the dark its luminosity was very marked. Stubbornly refusing to grow cool, it soon had the college in a state of real excitement; and when upon heating before the spectroscope it displayed shining bands unlike any known colours of the normal spectrum there was much breathless talk of new elements, bizarre optical properties, and other things which puzzled men of science are wont to say when faced by the unknown.
Hot as it was, they tested it in a crucible with all the proper reagents. Water did nothing. Hydrochloric acid was the same. Nitric acid and even aqua regia merely hissed and spattered against its torrid invulnerability. Ammi had difficulty in recalling all these things, but recognised some solvents as I mentioned them in the usual order of use. There were ammonia and caustic soda, alcohol and ether, nauseous carbon disulphide and a dozen others; but although the weight grew steadily less as time passed, and the fragment seemed to be slightly cooling, there was no change in the solvents to shew that they had attacked the substance at all. It was a metal, though, beyond a doubt. It was magnetic, for one thing; and after its immersion in the acid solvents there seemed to be faint traces of the Widmannstätten figures found on meteoric iron. When the cooling had grown very considerable, the testing was carried on in glass; and it was in a glass beaker that they left all the chips made of the original fragment during the work. The next morning both chips and beaker were gone without trace, and only a charred spot marked the place on the wooden shelf where they had been.
All this the professors told Ammi as they paused at his door, and once more he went with them to see the stony messenger from the stars, though this time his wife did not accompany him. It had now most certainly shrunk, and even the sober professors could not doubt the truth of what they saw. All around the dwindling brown lump near the well was a vacant space, except where the earth had caved in; and whereas it had been a good seven feet across the day before, it was now scarcely five. It was still hot, and the sages studied its surface curiously as they detached another and larger piece with hammer and chisel. They gouged deeply this time, and as they pried away the smaller mass they saw that the core of the thing was not quite homogeneous.
They had uncovered what seemed to be the side of a large coloured globule imbedded in the substance. The colour, which resembled some of the bands in the meteor’s strange spectrum, was almost impossible to describe; and it was only by analogy that they called it colour at all. Its texture was glossy, and upon tapping it appeared to promise both brittleness and hollowness. One of the professors gave it a smart blow with a hammer, and it burst with a nervous little pop. Nothing was emitted, and all trace of the thing vanished with the puncturing. It left behind a hollow spherical space about three inches across, and all thought it probable that others would be discovered as the enclosing substance wasted away.
Conjecture was vain; so after a futile attempt to find additional globules by drilling, the seekers left again with their new specimen—which proved, however, as baffling in the laboratory as its predecessor had been. Aside from being almost plastic, having heat, magnetism, and slight luminosity, cooling slightly in powerful acids, possessing an unknown spectrum, wasting away in air, and attacking silicon compounds with mutual destruction as a result, it presented no identifying features whatsoever; and at the end of the tests the college scientists were forced to own that they could not place it. It was nothing of this earth, but a piece of the great outside; and as such dowered with outside properties and obedient to outside laws.
That night there was a thunderstorm, and when the professors went out to Nahum’s the next day they met with a bitter disappointment. The stone, magnetic as it had been, must have had some peculiar electrical property; for it had “drawn the lightning”, as Nahum said, with a singular persistence. Six times within an hour the farmer saw the lightning strike the furrow in the front yard, and when the storm was over nothing remained but a ragged pit by the ancient well-sweep, half-choked with caved-in earth. Digging had borne no fruit, and the scientists verified the fact of the utter vanishment. The failure was total; so that nothing was left to do but go back to the laboratory and test again the disappearing fragment left carefully cased in lead. That fragment lasted a week, at the end of which nothing of value had been learned of it. When it had gone, no residue was left behind, and in time the professors felt scarcely sure they had indeed seen with waking eyes that cryptic vestige of the fathomless gulfs outside; that lone, weird message from other universes and other realms of matter, force, and entity.
As was natural, the Arkham papers made much of the incident with its collegiate sponsoring, and sent reporters to talk with Nahum Gardner and his family. At least one Boston daily also sent a scribe, and Nahum quickly became a kind of local celebrity. He was a lean, genial person of about fifty, living with his wife and three sons on the pleasant farmstead in the valley. He and Ammi exchanged visits frequently, as did their wives; and Ammi had nothing but praise for him after all these years. He seemed slightly proud of the notice his place had attracted, and talked often of the meteorite in the succeeding weeks. That July and August were hot, and Nahum worked hard at his haying in the ten-acre pasture across Chapman’s Brook; his rattling wain wearing deep ruts in the shadowy lanes between. The labour tired him more than it had in other years, and he felt that age was beginning to tell on him.
Then fell the time of fruit and harvest. The pears and apples slowly ripened, and Nahum vowed that his orchards were prospering as never before. The fruit was growing to phenomenal size and unwonted gloss, and in such abundance that extra barrels were ordered to handle the future crop. But with the ripening came sore disappointment; for of all that gorgeous array of specious lusciousness not one single jot was fit to eat. Into the fine flavour of the pears and apples had crept a stealthy bitterness and sickishness, so that even the smallest of bites induced a lasting disgust. It was the same with the melons and tomatoes, and Nahum sadly saw that his entire crop was lost. Quick to connect events, he declared that the meteorite had poisoned the soil, and thanked heaven that most of the other crops were in the upland lot along the road.
Winter came early, and was very cold. Ammi saw Nahum less often than usual, and observed that he had begun to look worried. The rest of his family, too, seemed to have grown taciturn; and were far from steady in their churchgoing or their attendance at the various social events of the countryside. For this reserve or melancholy no cause could be found, though all the household confessed now and then to poorer health and a feeling of vague disquiet. Nahum himself gave the most definite statement of anyone when he said he was disturbed about certain footprints in the snow. They were the usual winter prints of red squirrels, white rabbits, and foxes, but the brooding farmer professed to see something not quite right about their nature and arrangement. He was never specific, but appeared to think that they were not as characteristic of the anatomy and habits of squirrels and rabbits and foxes as they ought to be. Ammi listened without interest to this talk until one night when he drove past Nahum’s house in his sleigh on the way back from Clark’s Corners. There had been a moon, and a rabbit had run across the road, and the leaps of that rabbit were longer than either Ammi or his horse liked. The latter, indeed, had almost run away when brought up by a firm rein. Thereafter Ammi gave Nahum’s tales more respect, and wondered why the Gardner dogs seemed so cowed and quivering every morning. They had, it developed, nearly lost the spirit to bark.
In February the McGregor boys from Meadow Hill were out shooting woodchucks, and not far from the Gardner place bagged a very peculiar specimen. The proportions of its body seemed slightly altered in a queer way impossible to describe, while its face had taken on an expression which no one ever saw in a woodchuck before. The boys were genuinely frightened, and threw the thing away at once, so that only their grotesque tales of it ever reached the people of the countryside. But the shying of the horses near Nahum’s house had now become an acknowledged thing, and all the basis for a cycle of whispered legend was fast taking form.
People vowed that the snow melted faster around Nahum’s than it did anywhere else, and early in March there was an awed discussion in Potter’s general store at Clark’s Corners. Stephen Rice had driven past Gardner’s in the morning, and had noticed the skunk-cabbages coming up through the mud by the woods across the road. Never were things of such size seen before, and they held strange colours that could not be put into any words. Their shapes were monstrous, and the horse had snorted at an odour which struck Stephen as wholly unprecedented. That afternoon several persons drove past to see the abnormal growth, and all agreed that plants of that kind ought never to sprout in a healthy world. The bad fruit of the fall before was freely mentioned, and it went from mouth to mouth that there was poison in Nahum’s ground. Of course it was the meteorite; and remembering how strange the men from the college had found that stone to be, several farmers spoke about the matter to them.
One day they paid Nahum a visit; but having no love of wild tales and folklore were very conservative in what they inferred. The plants were certainly odd, but all skunk-cabbages are more or less odd in shape and odour and hue. Perhaps some mineral element from the stone had entered the soil, but it would soon be washed away. And as for the footprints and frightened horses—of course this was mere country talk which such a phenomenon as the aërolite would be certain to start. There was really nothing for serious men to do in cases of wild gossip, for superstitious rustics will say and believe anything. And so all through the strange days the professors stayed away in contempt. Only one of them, when given two phials of dust for analysis in a police job over a year and a half later, recalled that the queer colour of that skunk-cabbage had been very like one of the anomalous bands of light shewn by the meteor fragment in the college spectroscope, and like the brittle globule found imbedded in the stone from the abyss. The samples in this analysis case gave the same odd bands at first, though later they lost the property.
The trees budded prematurely around Nahum’s, and at night they swayed ominously in the wind. Nahum’s second son Thaddeus, a lad of fifteen, swore that they swayed also when there was no wind; but even the gossips would not credit this. Certainly, however, restlessness was in the air. The entire Gardner family developed the habit of stealthy listening, though not for any sound which they could consciously name. The listening was, indeed, rather a product of moments when consciousness seemed half to slip away. Unfortunately such moments increased week by week, till it became common speech that “something was wrong with all Nahum’s folks”. When the early saxifrage came out it had another strange colour; not quite like that of the skunk-cabbage, but plainly related and equally unknown to anyone who saw it. Nahum took some blossoms to Arkham and shewed them to the editor of the Gazette, but that dignitary did no more than write a humorous article about them, in which the dark fears of rustics were held up to polite ridicule. It was a mistake of Nahum’s to tell a stolid city man about the way the great, overgrown mourning-cloak butterflies behaved in connexion with these saxifrages.
April brought a kind of madness to the country folk, and began that disuse of the road past Nahum’s which led to its ultimate abandonment. It was the vegetation. All the orchard trees blossomed forth in strange colours, and through the stony soil of the yard and adjacent pasturage there sprang up a bizarre growth which only a botanist could connect with the proper flora of the region. No sane wholesome colours were anywhere to be seen except in the green grass and leafage; but everywhere those hectic and prismatic variants of some diseased, underlying primary tone without a place among the known tints of earth. The Dutchman’s breeches became a thing of sinister menace, and the bloodroots grew insolent in their chromatic perversion. Ammi and the Gardners thought that most of the colours had a sort of haunting familiarity, and decided that they reminded one of the brittle globule in the meteor. Nahum ploughed and sowed the ten-acre pasture and the upland lot, but did nothing with the land around the house. He knew it would be of no use, and hoped that the summer’s strange growths would draw all the poison from the soil. He was prepared for almost anything now, and had grown used to the sense of something near him waiting to be heard. The shunning of his house by neighbours told on him, of course; but it told on his wife more. The boys were better off, being at school each day; but they could not help being frightened by the gossip. Thaddeus, an especially sensitive youth, suffered the most.
In May the insects came, and Nahum’s place became a nightmare of buzzing and crawling. Most of the creatures seemed not quite usual in their aspects and motions, and their nocturnal habits contradicted all former experience. The Gardners took to watching at night—watching in all directions at random for something . . . they could not tell what. It was then that they all owned that Thaddeus had been right about the trees. Mrs. Gardner was the next to see it from the window as she watched the swollen boughs of a maple against a moonlit sky. The boughs surely moved, and there was no wind. It must be the sap. Strangeness had come into everything growing now. Yet it was none of Nahum’s family at all who made the next discovery. Familiarity had dulled them, and what they could not see was glimpsed by a timid windmill salesman from Bolton who drove by one night in ignorance of the country legends. What he told in Arkham was given a short paragraph in the Gazette; and it was there that all the farmers, Nahum included, saw it first. The night had been dark and the buggy-lamps faint, but around a farm in the valley which everyone knew from the account must be Nahum’s the darkness had been less thick. A dim though distinct luminosity seemed to inhere in all the vegetation, grass, leaves, and blossoms alike, while at one moment a detached piece of the phosphorescence appeared to stir furtively in the yard near the barn.
The grass had so far seemed untouched, and the cows were freely pastured in the lot near the house, but toward the end of May the milk began to be bad. Then Nahum had the cows driven to the uplands, after which the trouble ceased. Not long after this the change in grass and leaves became apparent to the eye. All the verdure was going grey, and was developing a highly singular quality of brittleness. Ammi was now the only person who ever visited the place, and his visits were becoming fewer and fewer. When school closed the Gardners were virtually cut off from the world, and sometimes let Ammi do their errands in town. They were failing curiously both physically and mentally, and no one was surprised when the news of Mrs. Gardner’s madness stole around.
It happened in June, about the anniversary of the meteor’s fall, and the poor woman screamed about things in the air which she could not describe. In her raving there was not a single specific noun, but only verbs and pronouns. Things moved and changed and fluttered, and ears tingled to impulses which were not wholly sounds. Something was taken away—she was being drained of something—something was fastening itself on her that ought not to be—someone must make it keep off—nothing was ever still in the night—the walls and windows shifted. Nahum did not send her to the county asylum, but let her wander about the house as long as she was harmless to herself and others. Even when her expression changed he did nothing. But when the boys grew afraid of her, and Thaddeus nearly fainted at the way she made faces at him, he decided to keep her locked in the attic. By July she had ceased to speak and crawled on all fours, and before that month was over Nahum got the mad notion that she was slightly luminous in the dark, as he now clearly saw was the case with the nearby vegetation.
It was a little before this that the horses had stampeded. Something had aroused them in the night, and their neighing and kicking in their stalls had been terrible. There seemed virtually nothing to do to calm them, and when Nahum opened the stable door they all bolted out like frightened woodland deer. It took a week to track all four, and when found they were seen to be quite useless and unmanageable. Something had snapped in their brains, and each one had to be shot for its own good. Nahum borrowed a horse from Ammi for his haying, but found it would not approach the barn. It shied, balked, and whinnied, and in the end he could do nothing but drive it into the yard while the men used their own strength to get the heavy wagon near enough the hayloft for convenient pitching. And all the while the vegetation was turning grey and brittle. Even the flowers whose hues had been so strange were greying now, and the fruit was coming out grey and dwarfed and tasteless. The asters and goldenrod bloomed grey and distorted, and the roses and zinneas and hollyhocks in the front yard were such blasphemous-looking things that Nahum’s oldest boy Zenas cut them down. The strangely puffed insects died about that time, even the bees that had left their hives and taken to the woods.
By September all the vegetation was fast crumbling to a greyish powder, and Nahum feared that the trees would die before the poison was out of the soil. His wife now had spells of terrific screaming, and he and the boys were in a constant state of nervous tension. They shunned people now, and when school opened the boys did not go. But it was Ammi, on one of his rare visits, who first realised that the well water was no longer good. It had an evil taste that was not exactly foetid nor exactly salty, and Ammi advised his friend to dig another well on higher ground to use till the soil was good again. Nahum, however, ignored the warning, for he had by that time become calloused to strange and unpleasant things. He and the boys continued to use the tainted supply, drinking it as listlessly and mechanically as they ate their meagre and ill-cooked meals and did their thankless and monotonous chores through the aimless days. There was something of stolid resignation about them all, as if they walked half in another world between lines of nameless guards to a certain and familiar doom.
Thaddeus went mad in September after a visit to the well. He had gone with a pail and had come back empty-handed, shrieking and waving his arms, and sometimes lapsing into an inane titter or a whisper about “the moving colours down there”. Two in one family was pretty bad, but Nahum was very brave about it. He let the boy run about for a week until he began stumbling and hurting himself, and then he shut him in an attic room across the hall from his mother’s. The way they screamed at each other from behind their locked doors was very terrible, especially to little Merwin, who fancied they talked in some terrible language that was not of earth. Merwin was getting frightfully imaginative, and his restlessness was worse after the shutting away of the brother who had been his greatest playmate.
Almost at the same time the mortality among the livestock commenced. Poultry turned greyish and died very quickly, their meat being found dry and noisome upon cutting. Hogs grew inordinately fat, then suddenly began to undergo loathsome changes which no one could explain. Their meat was of course useless, and Nahum was at his wit’s end. No rural veterinary would approach his place, and the city veterinary from Arkham was openly baffled. The swine began growing grey and brittle and falling to pieces before they died, and their eyes and muzzles developed singular alterations. It was very inexplicable, for they had never been fed from the tainted vegetation. Then something struck the cows. Certain areas or sometimes the whole body would be uncannily shrivelled or compressed, and atrocious collapses or disintegrations were common. In the last stages—and death was always the result—there would be a greying and turning brittle like that which beset the hogs. There could be no question of poison, for all the cases occurred in a locked and undisturbed barn. No bites of prowling things could have brought the virus, for what live beast of earth can pass through solid obstacles? It must be only natural disease—yet what disease could wreak such results was beyond any mind’s guessing. When the harvest came there was not an animal surviving on the place, for the stock and poultry were dead and the dogs had run away. These dogs, three in number, had all vanished one night and were never heard of again. The five cats had left some time before, but their going was scarcely noticed since there now seemed to be no mice, and only Mrs. Gardner had made pets of the graceful felines.
On the nineteenth of October Nahum staggered into Ammi’s house with hideous news. The death had come to poor Thaddeus in his attic room, and it had come in a way which could not be told. Nahum had dug a grave in the railed family plot behind the farm, and had put therein what he found. There could have been nothing from outside, for the small barred window and locked door were intact; but it was much as it had been in the barn. Ammi and his wife consoled the stricken man as best they could, but shuddered as they did so. Stark terror seemed to cling round the Gardners and all they touched, and the very presence of one in the house was a breath from regions unnamed and unnamable. Ammi accompanied Nahum home with the greatest reluctance, and did what he might to calm the hysterical sobbing of little Merwin. Zenas needed no calming. He had come of late to do nothing but stare into space and obey what his father told him; and Ammi thought that his fate was very merciful. Now and then Merwin’s screams were answered faintly from the attic, and in response to an inquiring look Nahum said that his wife was getting very feeble. When night approached, Ammi managed to get away; for not even friendship could make him stay in that spot when the faint glow of the vegetation began and the trees may or may not have swayed without wind. It was really lucky for Ammi that he was not more imaginative. Even as things were, his mind was bent ever so slightly; but had he been able to connect and reflect upon all the portents around him he must inevitably have turned a total maniac. In the twilight he hastened home, the screams of the mad woman and the nervous child ringing horribly in his ears.
Three days later Nahum lurched into Ammi’s kitchen in the early morning, and in the absence of his host stammered out a desperate tale once more, while Mrs. Pierce listened in a clutching fright. It was little Merwin this time. He was gone. He had gone out late at night with a lantern and pail for water, and had never come back. He’d been going to pieces for days, and hardly knew what he was about. Screamed at everything. There had been a frantic shriek from the yard then, but before the father could get to the door, the boy was gone. There was no glow from the lantern he had taken, and of the child himself no trace. At the time Nahum thought the lantern and pail were gone too; but when dawn came, and the man had plodded back from his all-night search of the woods and fields, he had found some very curious things near the well. There was a crushed and apparently somewhat melted mass of iron which had certainly been the lantern; while a bent bail and twisted iron hoops beside it, both half-fused, seemed to hint at the remnants of the pail. That was all. Nahum was past imagining, Mrs. Pierce was blank, and Ammi, when he had reached home and heard the tale, could give no guess. Merwin was gone, and there would be no use in telling the people around, who shunned all Gardners now. No use, either, in telling the city people at Arkham who laughed at everything. Thad was gone, and now Merwin was gone. Something was creeping and creeping and waiting to be seen and felt and heard. Nahum would go soon, and he wanted Ammi to look after his wife and Zenas if they survived him. It must all be a judgment of some sort; though he could not fancy what for, since he had always walked uprightly in the Lord’s ways so far as he knew.
For over two weeks Ammi saw nothing of Nahum; and then, worried about what might have happened, he overcame his fears and paid the Gardner place a visit. There was no smoke from the great chimney, and for a moment the visitor was apprehensive of the worst. The aspect of the whole farm was shocking—greyish withered grass and leaves on the ground, vines falling in brittle wreckage from archaic walls and gables, and great bare trees clawing up at the grey November sky with a studied malevolence which Ammi could not but feel had come from some subtle change in the tilt of the branches. But Nahum was alive, after all. He was weak, and lying on a couch in the low-ceiled kitchen, but perfectly conscious and able to give simple orders to Zenas. The room was deadly cold; and as Ammi visibly shivered, the host shouted huskily to Zenas for more wood. Wood, indeed, was sorely needed; since the cavernous fireplace was unlit and empty, with a cloud of soot blowing about in the chill wind that came down the chimney. Presently Nahum asked him if the extra wood had made him any more comfortable, and then Ammi saw what had happened. The stoutest cord had broken at last, and the hapless farmer’s mind was proof against more sorrow.
Questioning tactfully, Ammi could get no clear data at all about the missing Zenas. “In the well—he lives in the well—” was all that the clouded father would say. Then there flashed across the visitor’s mind a sudden thought of the mad wife, and he changed his line of inquiry. “Nabby? Why, here she is!” was the surprised response of poor Nahum, and Ammi soon saw that he must search for himself. Leaving the harmless babbler on the couch, he took the keys from their nail beside the door and climbed the creaking stairs to the attic. It was very close and noisome up there, and no sound could be heard from any direction. Of the four doors in sight, only one was locked, and on this he tried various keys on the ring he had taken. The third key proved the right one, and after some fumbling Ammi threw open the low white door.
It was quite dark inside, for the window was small and half-obscured by the crude wooden bars; and Ammi could see nothing at all on the wide-planked floor. The stench was beyond enduring, and before proceeding further he had to retreat to another room and return with his lungs filled with breathable air. When he did enter he saw something dark in the corner, and upon seeing it more clearly he screamed outright. While he screamed he thought a momentary cloud eclipsed the window, and a second later he felt himself brushed as if by some hateful current of vapour. Strange colours danced before his eyes; and had not a present horror numbed him he would have thought of the globule in the meteor that the geologist’s hammer had shattered, and of the morbid vegetation that had sprouted in the spring. As it was he thought only of the blasphemous monstrosity which confronted him, and which all too clearly had shared the nameless fate of young Thaddeus and the livestock. But the terrible thing about this horror was that it very slowly and perceptibly moved as it continued to crumble.
Ammi would give me no added particulars to this scene, but the shape in the corner does not reappear in his tale as a moving object. There are things which cannot be mentioned, and what is done in common humanity is sometimes cruelly judged by the law. I gathered that no moving thing was left in that attic room, and that to leave anything capable of motion there would have been a deed so monstrous as to damn any accountable being to eternal torment. Anyone but a stolid farmer would have fainted or gone mad, but Ammi walked conscious through that low doorway and locked the accursed secret behind him. There would be Nahum to deal with now; he must be fed and tended, and removed to some place where he could be cared for.
Commencing his descent of the dark stairs, Ammi heard a thud below him. He even thought a scream had been suddenly choked off, and recalled nervously the clammy vapour which had brushed by him in that frightful room above. What presence had his cry and entry started up? Halted by some vague fear, he heard still further sounds below. Indubitably there was a sort of heavy dragging, and a most detestably sticky noise as of some fiendish and unclean species of suction. With an associative sense goaded to feverish heights, he thought unaccountably of what he had seen upstairs. Good God! What eldritch dream-world was this into which he had blundered? He dared move neither backward nor forward, but stood there trembling at the black curve of the boxed-in staircase. Every trifle of the scene burned itself into his brain. The sounds, the sense of dread expectancy, the darkness, the steepness of the narrow steps—and merciful heaven! . . . the faint but unmistakable luminosity of all the woodwork in sight; steps, sides, exposed laths, and beams alike!
Then there burst forth a frantic whinny from Ammi’s horse outside, followed at once by a clatter which told of a frenzied runaway. In another moment horse and buggy had gone beyond earshot, leaving the frightened man on the dark stairs to guess what had sent them. But that was not all. There had been another sound out there. A sort of liquid splash—water—it must have been the well. He had left Hero untied near it, and a buggy-wheel must have brushed the coping and knocked in a stone. And still the pale phosphorescence glowed in that detestably ancient woodwork. God! how old the house was! Most of it built before 1670, and the gambrel roof not later than 1730.
A feeble scratching on the floor downstairs now sounded distinctly, and Ammi’s grip tightened on a heavy stick he had picked up in the attic for some purpose. Slowly nerving himself, he finished his descent and walked boldly toward the kitchen. But he did not complete the walk, because what he sought was no longer there. It had come to meet him, and it was still alive after a fashion. Whether it had crawled or whether it had been dragged by any external force, Ammi could not say; but the death had been at it. Everything had happened in the last half-hour, but collapse, greying, and disintegration were already far advanced. There was a horrible brittleness, and dry fragments were scaling off. Ammi could not touch it, but looked horrifiedly into the distorted parody that had been a face. “What was it, Nahum—what was it?” he whispered, and the cleft, bulging lips were just able to crackle out a final answer.
“Nothin’ . . . nothin’ . . . the colour . . . it burns . . . cold an’ wet . . . but it burns . . . it lived in the well . . . I seen it . . . a kind o’ smoke . . . jest like the flowers last spring . . . the well shone at night . . . Thad an’ Mernie an’ Zenas . . . everything alive . . . suckin’ the life out of everything . . . in that stone . . . it must a’ come in that stone . . . pizened the whole place . . . dun’t know what it wants . . . that round thing them men from the college dug outen the stone . . . they smashed it . . . it was that same colour . . . jest the same, like the flowers an’ plants . . . must a’ ben more of ’em . . . seeds . . . seeds . . . they growed . . . I seen it the fust time this week . . . must a’ got strong on Zenas . . . he was a big boy, full o’ life . . . it beats down your mind an’ then gits ye . . . burns ye up . . . in the well water . . . you was right about that . . . evil water . . . Zenas never come back from the well . . . can’t git away . . . draws ye . . . ye know summ’at’s comin’, but ’tain’t no use . . . I seen it time an’ agin senct Zenas was took . . . whar’s Nabby, Ammi? . . . my head’s no good . . . dun’t know how long senct I fed her . . . it’ll git her ef we ain’t keerful . . . jest a colour . . . her face is gettin’ to hev that colour sometimes towards night . . . an’ it burns an’ sucks . . . it come from some place whar things ain’t as they is here . . . one o’ them professors said so . . . he was right . . . look out, Ammi, it’ll do suthin’ more . . . sucks the life out. . . .”
But that was all. That which spoke could speak no more because it had completely caved in. Ammi laid a red checked tablecloth over what was left and reeled out the back door into the fields. He climbed the slope to the ten-acre pasture and stumbled home by the north road and the woods. He could not pass that well from which his horse had run away. He had looked at it through the window, and had seen that no stone was missing from the rim. Then the lurching buggy had not dislodged anything after all—the splash had been something else—something which went into the well after it had done with poor Nahum. . . .
When Ammi reached his house the horse and buggy had arrived before him and thrown his wife into fits of anxiety. Reassuring her without explanations, he set out at once for Arkham and notified the authorities that the Gardner family was no more. He indulged in no details, but merely told of the deaths of Nahum and Nabby, that of Thaddeus being already known, and mentioned that the cause seemed to be the same strange ailment which had killed the livestock. He also stated that Merwin and Zenas had disappeared. There was considerable questioning at the police station, and in the end Ammi was compelled to take three officers to the Gardner farm, together with the coroner, the medical examiner, and the veterinary who had treated the diseased animals. He went much against his will, for the afternoon was advancing and he feared the fall of night over that accursed place, but it was some comfort to have so many people with him.
The six men drove out in a democrat-wagon, following Ammi’s buggy, and arrived at the pest-ridden farmhouse about four o’clock. Used as the officers were to gruesome experiences, not one remained unmoved at what was found in the attic and under the red checked tablecloth on the floor below. The whole aspect of the farm with its grey desolation was terrible enough, but those two crumbling objects were beyond all bounds. No one could look long at them, and even the medical examiner admitted that there was very little to examine. Specimens could be analysed, of course, so he busied himself in obtaining them—and here it develops that a very puzzling aftermath occurred at the college laboratory where the two phials of dust were finally taken. Under the spectroscope both samples gave off an unknown spectrum, in which many of the baffling bands were precisely like those which the strange meteor had yielded in the previous year. The property of emitting this spectrum vanished in a month, the dust thereafter consisting mainly of alkaline phosphates and carbonates.
Ammi would not have told the men about the well if he had thought they meant to do anything then and there. It was getting toward sunset, and he was anxious to be away. But he could not help glancing nervously at the stony curb by the great sweep, and when a detective questioned him he admitted that Nahum had feared something down there—so much so that he had never even thought of searching it for Merwin or Zenas. After that nothing would do but that they empty and explore the well immediately, so Ammi had to wait trembling while pail after pail of rank water was hauled up and splashed on the soaking ground outside. The men sniffed in disgust at the fluid, and toward the last held their noses against the foetor they were uncovering. It was not so long a job as they had feared it would be, since the water was phenomenally low. There is no need to speak too exactly of what they found. Merwin and Zenas were both there, in part, though the vestiges were mainly skeletal. There were also a small deer and a large dog in about the same state, and a number of bones of smaller animals. The ooze and slime at the bottom seemed inexplicably porous and bubbling, and a man who descended on hand-holds with a long pole found that he could sink the wooden shaft to any depth in the mud of the floor without meeting any solid obstruction.
Twilight had now fallen, and lanterns were brought from the house. Then, when it was seen that nothing further could be gained from the well, everyone went indoors and conferred in the ancient sitting-room while the intermittent light of a spectral half-moon played wanly on the grey desolation outside. The men were frankly nonplussed by the entire case, and could find no convincing common element to link the strange vegetable conditions, the unknown disease of livestock and humans, and the unaccountable deaths of Merwin and Zenas in the tainted well. They had heard the common country talk, it is true; but could not believe that anything contrary to natural law had occurred. No doubt the meteor had poisoned the soil, but the illness of persons and animals who had eaten nothing grown in that soil was another matter. Was it the well water? Very possibly. It might be a good idea to analyse it. But what peculiar madness could have made both boys jump into the well? Their deeds were so similar—and the fragments shewed that they had both suffered from the grey brittle death. Why was everything so grey and brittle?
It was the coroner, seated near a window overlooking the yard, who first noticed the glow about the well. Night had fully set in, and all the abhorrent grounds seemed faintly luminous with more than the fitful moonbeams; but this new glow was something definite and distinct, and appeared to shoot up from the black pit like a softened ray from a searchlight, giving dull reflections in the little ground pools where the water had been emptied. It had a very queer colour, and as all the men clustered round the window Ammi gave a violent start. For this strange beam of ghastly miasma was to him of no unfamiliar hue. He had seen that colour before, and feared to think what it might mean. He had seen it in the nasty brittle globule in that aërolite two summers ago, had seen it in the crazy vegetation of the springtime, and had thought he had seen it for an instant that very morning against the small barred window of that terrible attic room where nameless things had happened. It had flashed there a second, and a clammy and hateful current of vapour had brushed past him—and then poor Nahum had been taken by something of that colour. He had said so at the last—said it was the globule and the plants. After that had come the runaway in the yard and the splash in the well—and now that well was belching forth to the night a pale insidious beam of the same daemoniac tint.
It does credit to the alertness of Ammi’s mind that he puzzled even at that tense moment over a point which was essentially scientific. He could not but wonder at his gleaning of the same impression from a vapour glimpsed in the daytime, against a window opening on the morning sky, and from a nocturnal exhalation seen as a phosphorescent mist against the black and blasted landscape. It wasn’t right—it was against Nature—and he thought of those terrible last words of his stricken friend, “It come from some place whar things ain’t as they is here . . . one o’ them professors said so. . . .”
All three horses outside, tied to a pair of shrivelled saplings by the road, were now neighing and pawing frantically. The wagon driver started for the door to do something, but Ammi laid a shaky hand on his shoulder. “Dun’t go out thar,” he whispered. “They’s more to this nor what we know. Nahum said somethin’ lived in the well that sucks your life out. He said it must be some’at growed from a round ball like one we all seen in the meteor stone that fell a year ago June. Sucks an’ burns, he said, an’ is jest a cloud of colour like that light out thar now, that ye can hardly see an’ can’t tell what it is. Nahum thought it feeds on everything livin’ an’ gits stronger all the time. He said he seen it this last week. It must be somethin’ from away off in the sky like the men from the college last year says the meteor stone was. The way it’s made an’ the way it works ain’t like no way o’ God’s world. It’s some’at from beyond.”
So the men paused indecisively as the light from the well grew stronger and the hitched horses pawed and whinnied in increasing frenzy. It was truly an awful moment; with terror in that ancient and accursed house itself, four monstrous sets of fragments—two from the house and two from the well—in the woodshed behind, and that shaft of unknown and unholy iridescence from the slimy depths in front. Ammi had restrained the driver on impulse, forgetting how uninjured he himself was after the clammy brushing of that coloured vapour in the attic room, but perhaps it is just as well that he acted as he did. No one will ever know what was abroad that night; and though the blasphemy from beyond had not so far hurt any human of unweakened mind, there is no telling what it might not have done at that last moment, and with its seemingly increased strength and the special signs of purpose it was soon to display beneath the half-clouded moonlit sky.
All at once one of the detectives at the window gave a short, sharp gasp. The others looked at him, and then quickly followed his own gaze upward to the point at which its idle straying had been suddenly arrested. There was no need for words. What had been disputed in country gossip was disputable no longer, and it is because of the thing which every man of that party agreed in whispering later on that the strange days are never talked about in Arkham. It is necessary to premise that there was no wind at that hour of the evening. One did arise not long afterward, but there was absolutely none then. Even the dry tips of the lingering hedge-mustard, grey and blighted, and the fringe on the roof of the standing democrat-wagon were unstirred. And yet amid that tense, godless calm the high bare boughs of all the trees in the yard were moving. They were twitching morbidly and spasmodically, clawing in convulsive and epileptic madness at the moonlit clouds; scratching impotently in the noxious air as if jerked by some alien and bodiless line of linkage with subterrene horrors writhing and struggling below the black roots.
Not a man breathed for several seconds. Then a cloud of darker depth passed over the moon, and the silhouette of clutching branches faded out momentarily. At this there was a general cry; muffled with awe, but husky and almost identical from every throat. For the terror had not faded with the silhouette, and in a fearsome instant of deeper darkness the watchers saw wriggling at that treetop height a thousand tiny points of faint and unhallowed radiance, tipping each bough like the fire of St. Elmo or the flames that came down on the apostles’ heads at Pentecost. It was a monstrous constellation of unnatural light, like a glutted swarm of corpse-fed fireflies dancing hellish sarabands over an accursed marsh; and its colour was that same nameless intrusion which Ammi had come to recognise and dread. All the while the shaft of phosphorescence from the well was getting brighter and brighter, bringing to the minds of the huddled men a sense of doom and abnormality which far outraced any image their conscious minds could form. It was no longer shining out, it was pouring out; and as the shapeless stream of unplaceable colour left the well it seemed to flow directly into the sky.
The veterinary shivered, and walked to the front door to drop the heavy extra bar across it. Ammi shook no less, and had to tug and point for lack of a controllable voice when he wished to draw notice to the growing luminosity of the trees. The neighing and stamping of the horses had become utterly frightful, but not a soul of that group in the old house would have ventured forth for any earthly reward. With the moments the shining of the trees increased, while their restless branches seemed to strain more and more toward verticality. The wood of the well-sweep was shining now, and presently a policeman dumbly pointed to some wooden sheds and bee-hives near the stone wall on the west. They were commencing to shine, too, though the tethered vehicles of the visitors seemed so far unaffected. Then there was a wild commotion and clopping in the road, and as Ammi quenched the lamp for better seeing they realised that the span of frantic greys had broke their sapling and run off with the democrat-wagon.
The shock served to loosen several tongues, and embarrassed whispers were exchanged. “It spreads on everything organic that’s been around here,” muttered the medical examiner. No one replied, but the man who had been in the well gave a hint that his long pole must have stirred up something intangible. “It was awful,” he added. “There was no bottom at all. Just ooze and bubbles and the feeling of something lurking under there.” Ammi’s horse still pawed and screamed deafeningly in the road outside, and nearly drowned its owner’s faint quaver as he mumbled his formless reflections. “It come from that stone . . . it growed down thar . . . it got everything livin’ . . . it fed itself on ’em, mind and body . . . Thad an’ Mernie, Zenas an’ Nabby . . . Nahum was the last . . . they all drunk the water . . . it got strong on ’em . . . it come from beyond, whar things ain’t like they be here . . . now it’s goin’ home. . . .”
At this point, as the column of unknown colour flared suddenly stronger and began to weave itself into fantastic suggestions of shape which each spectator later described differently, there came from poor tethered Hero such a sound as no man before or since ever heard from a horse. Every person in that low-pitched sitting room stopped his ears, and Ammi turned away from the window in horror and nausea. Words could not convey it—when Ammi looked out again the hapless beast lay huddled inert on the moonlit ground between the splintered shafts of the buggy. That was the last of Hero till they buried him next day. But the present was no time to mourn, for almost at this instant a detective silently called attention to something terrible in the very room with them. In the absence of the lamplight it was clear that a faint phosphorescence had begun to pervade the entire apartment. It glowed on the broad-planked floor and the fragment of rag carpet, and shimmered over the sashes of the small-paned windows. It ran up and down the exposed corner-posts, coruscated about the shelf and mantel, and infected the very doors and furniture. Each minute saw it strengthen, and at last it was very plain that healthy living things must leave that house.
Ammi shewed them the back door and the path up through the fields to the ten-acre pasture. They walked and stumbled as in a dream, and did not dare look back till they were far away on the high ground. They were glad of the path, for they could not have gone the front way, by that well. It was bad enough passing the glowing barn and sheds, and those shining orchard trees with their gnarled, fiendish contours; but thank heaven the branches did their worst twisting high up. The moon went under some very black clouds as they crossed the rustic bridge over Chapman’s Brook, and it was blind groping from there to the open meadows.
When they looked back toward the valley and the distant Gardner place at the bottom they saw a fearsome sight. All the farm was shining with the hideous unknown blend of colour; trees, buildings, and even such grass and herbage as had not been wholly changed to lethal grey brittleness. The boughs were all straining skyward, tipped with tongues of foul flame, and lambent tricklings of the same monstrous fire were creeping about the ridgepoles of the house, barn, and sheds. It was a scene from a vision of Fuseli, and over all the rest reigned that riot of luminous amorphousness, that alien and undimensioned rainbow of cryptic poison from the well—seething, feeling, lapping, reaching, scintillating, straining, and malignly bubbling in its cosmic and unrecognisable chromaticism.
Then without warning the hideous thing shot vertically up toward the sky like a rocket or meteor, leaving behind no trail and disappearing through a round and curiously regular hole in the clouds before any man could gasp or cry out. No watcher can ever forget that sight, and Ammi stared blankly at the stars of Cygnus, Deneb twinkling above the others, where the unknown colour had melted into the Milky Way. But his gaze was the next moment called swiftly to earth by the crackling in the valley. It was just that. Only a wooden ripping and crackling, and not an explosion, as so many others of the party vowed. Yet the outcome was the same, for in one feverish, kaleidoscopic instant there burst up from that doomed and accursed farm a gleamingly eruptive cataclysm of unnatural sparks and substance; blurring the glance of the few who saw it, and sending forth to the zenith a bombarding cloudburst of such coloured and fantastic fragments as our universe must needs disown. Through quickly re-closing vapours they followed the great morbidity that had vanished, and in another second they had vanished too. Behind and below was only a darkness to which the men dared not return, and all about was a mounting wind which seemed to sweep down in black, frore gusts from interstellar space. It shrieked and howled, and lashed the fields and distorted woods in a mad cosmic frenzy, till soon the trembling party realised it would be no use waiting for the moon to shew what was left down there at Nahum’s.
Too awed even to hint theories, the seven shaking men trudged back toward Arkham by the north road. Ammi was worse than his fellows, and begged them to see him inside his own kitchen, instead of keeping straight on to town. He did not wish to cross the nighted, wind-whipped woods alone to his home on the main road. For he had had an added shock that the others were spared, and was crushed forever with a brooding fear he dared not even mention for many years to come. As the rest of the watchers on that tempestuous hill had stolidly set their faces toward the road, Ammi had looked back an instant at the shadowed valley of desolation so lately sheltering his ill-starred friend. And from that stricken, far-away spot he had seen something feebly rise, only to sink down again upon the place from which the great shapeless horror had shot into the sky. It was just a colour—but not any colour of our earth or heavens. And because Ammi recognised that colour, and knew that this last faint remnant must still lurk down there in the well, he has never been quite right since.
Ammi would never go near the place again. It is over half a century now since the horror happened, but he has never been there, and will be glad when the new reservoir blots it out. I shall be glad, too, for I do not like the way the sunlight changed colour around the mouth of that abandoned well I passed. I hope the water will always be very deep—but even so, I shall never drink it. I do not think I shall visit the Arkham country hereafter. Three of the men who had been with Ammi returned the next morning to see the ruins by daylight, but there were not any real ruins. Only the bricks of the chimney, the stones of the cellar, some mineral and metallic litter here and there, and the rim of that nefandous well. Save for Ammi’s dead horse, which they towed away and buried, and the buggy which they shortly returned to him, everything that had ever been living had gone. Five eldritch acres of dusty grey desert remained, nor has anything ever grown there since. To this day it sprawls open to the sky like a great spot eaten by acid in the woods and fields, and the few who have ever dared glimpse it in spite of the rural tales have named it “the blasted heath”.
The rural tales are queer. They might be even queerer if city men and college chemists could be interested enough to analyse the water from that disused well, or the grey dust that no wind seems ever to disperse. Botanists, too, ought to study the stunted flora on the borders of that spot, for they might shed light on the country notion that the blight is spreading—little by little, perhaps an inch a year. People say the colour of the neighbouring herbage is not quite right in the spring, and that wild things leave queer prints in the light winter snow. Snow never seems quite so heavy on the blasted heath as it is elsewhere. Horses—the few that are left in this motor age—grow skittish in the silent valley; and hunters cannot depend on their dogs too near the splotch of greyish dust.
They say the mental influences are very bad, too. Numbers went queer in the years after Nahum’s taking, and always they lacked the power to get away. Then the stronger-minded folk all left the region, and only the foreigners tried to live in the crumbling old homesteads. They could not stay, though; and one sometimes wonders what insight beyond ours their wild, weird stores of whispered magic have given them. Their dreams at night, they protest, are very horrible in that grotesque country; and surely the very look of the dark realm is enough to stir a morbid fancy. No traveller has ever escaped a sense of strangeness in those deep ravines, and artists shiver as they paint thick woods whose mystery is as much of the spirit as of the eye. I myself am curious about the sensation I derived from my one lone walk before Ammi told me his tale. When twilight came I had vaguely wished some clouds would gather, for an odd timidity about the deep skyey voids above had crept into my soul.
Do not ask me for my opinion. I do not know—that is all. There was no one but Ammi to question; for Arkham people will not talk about the strange days, and all three professors who saw the aërolite and its coloured globule are dead. There were other globules—depend upon that. One must have fed itself and escaped, and probably there was another which was too late. No doubt it is still down the well—I know there was something wrong with the sunlight I saw above that miasmal brink. The rustics say the blight creeps an inch a year, so perhaps there is a kind of growth or nourishment even now. But whatever daemon hatchling is there, it must be tethered to something or else it would quickly spread. Is it fastened to the roots of those trees that claw the air? One of the current Arkham tales is about fat oaks that shine and move as they ought not to do at night.
What it is, only God knows. In terms of matter I suppose the thing Ammi described would be called a gas, but this gas obeyed laws that are not of our cosmos. This was no fruit of such worlds and suns as shine on the telescopes and photographic plates of our observatories. This was no breath from the skies whose motions and dimensions our astronomers measure or deem too vast to measure. It was just a colour out of space—a frightful messenger from unformed realms of infinity beyond all Nature as we know it; from realms whose mere existence stuns the brain and numbs us with the black extra-cosmic gulfs it throws open before our frenzied eyes.
I doubt very much if Ammi consciously lied to me, and I do not think his tale was all a freak of madness as the townfolk had forewarned. Something terrible came to the hills and valleys on that meteor, and something terrible—though I know not in what proportion—still remains. I shall be glad to see the water come. Meanwhile I hope nothing will happen to Ammi. He saw so much of the thing—and its influence was so insidious. Why has he never been able to move away? How clearly he recalled those dying words of Nahum’s—“can’t git away . . . draws ye . . . ye know summ’at’s comin’, but ’tain’t no use. . . .” Ammi is such a good old man—when the reservoir gang gets to work I must write the chief engineer to keep a sharp watch on him. I would hate to think of him as the grey, twisted, brittle monstrosity which persists more and more in troubling my sleep.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you, and thank you to the Center for
National Interest for honoring me with this invitation. It truly is a great
honor. I’d like to talk today about how to develop a new foreign policy
direction for our country, one that replaces randomness with purpose, ideology
with strategy, and chaos with peace.

It’s time to shake the rust off America’s foreign policy. It’s time to invite
new voices and new visions into the fold, something we have to do. The
direction I will outline today will also return us to a timeless principle. My
foreign policy will always put the interests of the American people and
American security above all else. It has to be first. Has to be.

That will be the foundation of every single decision that I will make.

America First will be the major and overriding theme of my administration. But
to chart our path forward, we must first briefly take a look back. We have a
lot to be proud of.
Continue reading the main story

In the 1940s we saved the world. The greatest generation beat back the Nazis
and Japanese imperialists. Then we saved the world again. This time, from
totalitarianism and communism. The Cold War lasted for decades but, guess what,
we won and we won big. Democrats and Republicans working together got Mr.
Gorbachev to heed the words of President Reagan, our great president, when he
said, tear down this wall.

History will not forget what he did. A very special man and president.
Unfortunately, after the Cold War our foreign policy veered badly off course.
We failed to develop a new vision for a new time. In fact, as time went on, our
foreign policy began to make less and less sense. Logic was replaced with
foolishness and arrogance, which led to one foreign policy disaster after
another.

They just kept coming and coming. We went from mistakes in Iraq to Egypt to
Libya, to President Obama’s line in the sand in Syria. Each of these actions
have helped to throw the region into chaos and gave ISIS the space it needs to
grow and prosper. Very bad. It all began with a dangerous idea that we could
make western democracies out of countries that had no experience or interests
in becoming a western democracy.

We tore up what institutions they had and then were surprised at what we
unleashed. Civil war, religious fanaticism, thousands of Americans and just
killed be lives, lives, lives wasted. Horribly wasted. Many trillions of
dollars were lost as a result. The vacuum was created that ISIS would fill.
Iran, too, would rush in and fill that void much to their really unjust
enrichment.

They have benefited so much, so sadly, for us. Our foreign policy is a complete
and total disaster. No vision. No purpose. No direction. No strategy. Today I
want to identify five main weaknesses in our foreign policy.

First, our resources are totally over extended. President Obama has weakened
our military by weakening our economy. He’s crippled us with wasteful spending,
massive debt, low growth, a huge trade deficit and open borders. Our
manufacturing trade deficit with the world is now approaching $1 trillion a
year.

We’re rebuilding other countries while weakening our own. Ending the theft of
American jobs will give us resources we need to rebuild our military, which has
to happen and regain our financial independence and strength. I am the only
person running for the presidency who understands this and this is a serious
problem.

I’m the only one — believe me, I know them all, I’m the only one who knows how
to fix it.

Secondly, our allies are not paying their fair share, and I’ve been talking
about this recently a lot. Our allies must contribute toward their financial,
political, and human costs, have to do it, of our tremendous security burden.
But many of them are simply not doing so.

They look at the United States as weak and forgiving and feel no obligation to
honor their agreements with us. In NATO, for instance, only 4 of 28 other
member countries besides America, are spending the minimum required 2 percent
of GDP on defense. We have spent trillions of dollars over time on planes,
missiles, ships, equipment, building up our military to provide a strong
defense for Europe and Asia.

The countries we are defending must pay for the cost of this defense, and if
not, the U.S. must be prepared to let these countries defend themselves. We
have no choice.

The whole world will be safer if our allies do their part to support our common
defense and security. A Trump administration will lead a free world that is
properly armed and funded, and funded beautifully.

Thirdly, our friends are beginning to think they can’t depend on us. We’ve had
a president who dislikes our friends and bows to our enemies, something that
we’ve never seen before in the history of our country. He negotiated a
disastrous deal with Iran, and then we watched them ignore its terms even
before the ink was dry. Iran cannot be allowed to have a nuclear weapon, cannot
be allowed. Remember that, cannot be allowed to have a nuclear weapon.

And under a Trump administration, will never, ever be allowed to have that
nuclear weapon.

All of this without even mentioning the humiliation of the United States with
Iran’s treatment of our ten captured sailors — so vividly I remember that day.
In negotiation, you must be willing to walk. The Iran deal, like so many of our
worst agreements, is the result of not being willing to leave the table.

When the other side knows you’re not going to walk, it becomes absolutely
impossible to win — you just can’t win. At the same time, your friends need to
know that you will stick by the agreements that you have with them. You’ve made
that agreement, you have to stand by it and the world will be a better place.
President Obama gutted our missile defense program and then abandoned our
missile defense plans with Poland and the Czech Republic. He supported the
ouster of a friendly regime in Egypt that had a longstanding peace treaty with
Israel, and then helped bring the Muslim Brotherhood to power in its place.

Israel, our great friend and the one true democracy in the Middle East has been
snubbed and criticized by an administration that lacks moral clarity. Just a
few days ago, Vice President Biden again criticized Israel, a force for justice
and peace, for acting as an impatient peace area in the region.

President Obama has not been a friend to Israel. He has treated Iran with
tender love and care and made it a great power. Iran has, indeed, become a
great, great power in just a very short period of time, because of what we’ve
done. All of the expense and all at the expense of Israel, our allies in the
region and very importantly, the United States itself.

We’ve picked fights with our oldest friends, and now they’re starting to look
elsewhere for help. Remember that. Not good.

Fourth, our rivals no longer respect us. In fact, they’re just as confused as
our allies, but in an even bigger problem is they don’t take us seriously
anymore. The truth is they don’t respect us. When President Obama landed in
Cuba on Air Force One, no leader was there, nobody, to greet him.

Perhaps an incident without precedent in the long and prestigious history of
Air Force One. Then amazingly, the same thing happened in Saudi Arabia. It’s
called no respect. Absolutely no respect.

Do you remember when the president made a long and expensive trip to
Copenhagen, Denmark, to get the Olympics for our country, and after this
unprecedented effort, it was announced that the United States came in fourth —
fourth place? The president of the United States making this trip —
unprecedented — comes in fourth place. He should have known the result before
making such an embarrassing commitment. We were laughed at all over the world,
as we have been many, many times.

The list of humiliations go on and on and on. President Obama watches
helplessly as North Korea increases its aggression and expands further and
further with its nuclear reach. Our president has allowed China to continue its
economic assault on American jobs and wealth, refusing to enforce trade deals
and apply leverage on China necessary to rein in North Korea. We have the
leverage. We have the power over China, economic power, and people don’t
understand it. And with that economic power, we can rein in and we can get them
to do what they have to do with North Korea, which is totally out of control.

He has even allowed China to steal government secrets with cyber attacks and
engaged in industrial espionage against the United States and its companies.
We’ve let our rivals and challengers think they can get away with anything, and
they do. They do at will. It always happens. If President Obama’s goal had been
to weaken America, he could not have done a better job.

Finally, America no longer has a clear understanding of our foreign policy
goals. Since the end of the Cold War and the breakup of the Soviet Union, we’ve
lacked a coherent foreign policy. One day, we’re bombing Libya and getting rid
of a dictator to foster democracy for civilians. The next day, we’re watching
the same civilians suffer while that country falls and absolutely falls apart.
Lives lost, massive moneys lost. The world is a different place.

We’re a humanitarian nation, but the legacy of the Obama-Clinton interventions
will be weakness, confusion and disarray, a mess. We’ve made the Middle East
more unstable and chaotic than ever before. We left Christians subject to
intense persecution and even genocide.

We have done nothing to help the Christians, nothing, and we should always be
ashamed for that, for that lack of action. Our actions in Iraq, Libya and Syria
have helped unleash ISIS, and we’re in a war against radical Islam, but
President Obama won’t even name the enemy, and unless you name the enemy, you
will never ever solve the problem.

Hillary Clinton also refuses to say the words radical Islam, even as she pushes
for a massive increase in refugees coming into our country. After Secretary
Clinton’s failed intervention in Libya, Islamic terrorists in Benghazi took
down our consulate and killed our ambassador and three brave Americans. Then,
instead of taking charge that night, Hillary Clinton decided to go home and
sleep. Incredible.

Clinton blames it all on a video, an excuse that was a total lie, proven to be
absolutely a total lie. Our ambassador was murdered and our secretary of state
misled the nation. And, by the way, she was not awake to take that call at 3
o’clock in the morning. And now ISIS is making millions and millions of dollars
a week selling Libya oil. And you know what? We don’t blockade, we don’t bomb,
we don’t do anything about it. It’s almost as if our country doesn’t even know
what’s happening, which could be a fact and could be true. This will all change
when I become president.

To our friends and allies, I say America is going to be strong again. America
is going to be reliable again. It’s going to be a great and reliable ally
again. It’s going to be a friend again. We’re going to finally have a coherent
foreign policy based upon American interests and the shared interests of our
allies.

We’re getting out of the nation-building business and instead focusing on
creating stability in the world. Our moments of greatest strength came when
politics ended at the water’s edge. We need a new rational American foreign
policy, informed by the best minds and supported by both parties, and it will
be by both parties — Democrats, Republicans, independents, everybody, as well
as by our close allies.

This is how we won the Cold War and it’s how we will win our new future
struggles, which may be many, which may be complex, but we will win if I become
president.

First, we need a long-term plan to halt the spread and reach of radical Islam.
Containing the spread of radical Islam must be a major foreign policy goal of
the United States and indeed the world. Events may require the use of military
force, but it’s also a philosophical struggle, like our long struggle in the
Cold War.

In this, we’re going to be working very closely with our allies in the Muslim
world, all of which are at risk from radical Islamic violence, attacks and
everything else. It is a dangerous world, more dangerous now than it has ever
been.

We should work — thank you.

We should work together with any nation in the region that is threatened by the
rise of radical Islam. But this has to be a two-way street. They must also be
good to us. Remember that. They have to be good to us, no longer one way. It’s
now two-way. And remember, us and all we’re doing, they have to appreciate what
we’ve done to them. We’re going to help, but they have to appreciate what we’ve
done for them. The struggle against radical Islam also takes place in our
homeland. There are scores of recent migrants inside our borders charged with
terrorism. For every case known to the public, there are dozens and dozens
more. We must stop importing extremism through senseless immigration policies.
We have no idea where these people are coming from. There’s no documentation.
There’s no paperwork. There’s nothing. We have to be smart. We have to be
vigilant.

A pause for reassessment will help us to prevent the next San Bernardino or
frankly, much worse. All you have to do is look at the World Trade Center and
September 11th, one of the great catastrophes, in my opinion, the single
greatest military catastrophe in the history of our country; worse than Pearl
Harbor because you take a look at what’s happened, and citizens were attacked,
as opposed to the military being attacked — one of the true great catastrophes.

And then there’s ISIS. I have a simple message for them. Their days are
numbered. I won’t tell them where and I won’t tell them how. We must...

we must as a nation be more unpredictable. We are totally predictable. We tell
everything. We’re sending troops. We tell them. We’re sending something else.
We have a news conference. We have to be unpredictable. And we have to be
unpredictable starting now.

But they’re going to be gone. ISIS will be gone if I’m elected president. And
they’ll be gone quickly. They will be gone very, very quickly.

Secondly, we have to rebuild our military and our economy. The Russians and
Chinese have rapidly expanded their military capability, but look at what’s
happened to us. Our nuclear weapons arsenal, our ultimate deterrent, has been
allowed to atrophy and is desperately in need of modernization and renewal. And
it has to happen immediately. Our active duty armed forces have shrunk from 2
million in 1991 to about 1.3 million today. The Navy has shrunk from over 500
ships to 272 ships during this same period of time. The Air Force is about
one-third smaller than 1991. Pilots flying B-52s in combat missions today.
These planes are older than virtually everybody in this room.

And what are we doing about this? President Obama has proposed a 2017 defense
budget that in real dollars, cuts nearly 25 percent from what we were spending
in 2011. Our military is depleted and we’re asking our generals and military
leaders to worry about global warming.

We will spend what we need to rebuild our military. It is the cheapest, single
investment we can make. We will develop, build and purchase the best equipment
known to mankind. Our military dominance must be unquestioned, and I mean
unquestioned, by anybody and everybody.

But we will look for savings and spend our money wisely. In this time of
mounting debt, right now we have so much debt that nobody even knows how to
address the problem. But I do. No one dollar can be wasted. Not one single
dollar can we waste. We’re also going to have to change our trade, immigration
and economic policies to make our economy strong again. And to put Americans
first again.

This will ensure that our own workers, right here in America, get the jobs and
higher pay that will grow our tax revenues, increase our economic might as a
nation, make us strong financially again. So, so important. We need to think
smart about areas where our technological superiority, and nobody comes close,
gives us an edge.

This includes 3D printing, artificial intelligence and cyber warfare. A great
country also takes care of its warriors. Our commitment to them is absolute,
and I mean absolute. A Trump administration will give our servicemen and women
the best equipment and support in the world when they serve and where they
serve. And the best care in the world when they return as veterans and they
come back home to civilian life. Our veterans...

Our veterans have not been treated fairly or justly. These are our great people
and we must treat them fairly. We must even treat them really, really well and
that will happen under the Trump administration.

Finally, we must develop a foreign policy based on American interests.
Businesses do not succeed when they lose sight of their core interests and
neither do countries. Look at what happened in the 1990s. Our embassies in
Kenya and Tanzania — and this was a horrible time for us — were attacked. and
17 brave sailors were killed on the U.S.S. Cole.

And what did we do? It seemed we put more effort into adding China into the
World Trade organization, which has been a total disaster for the United
States. Frankly, we spent more time on that than we did in stopping Al Qaeda.
We even had an opportunity to take out Osama bin Laden and we didn’t do it

And then we got hit at the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. Again, the
worst attack on our country in its history. Our foreign policy goals must be
based on America’s core national security interests. And the following will be
my priorities.

In the Middle East our goals must be, and I mean must be, to defeat terrorists
and promote regional stability, not radical change. We need to be clearsighted
about the groups that will never be anything other than enemies. And believe
me, we have groups that no matter what you do, they will be the enemy.: We have
to be smart enough to recognize who those groups are, who those people are, and
not help them. And we must only be generous to those that prove they are indeed
our friends.

We desire to live peacefully and in friendship with Russia and China. We have
serious differences with these two nations, and must regard them with open
eyes, but we are not bound to be adversaries. We should seek common ground
based on shared interests.

Russia, for instance, has also seen the horror of Islamic terrorism. I believe
an easing of tensions, and improved relations with Russia from a position of
strength only is possible, absolutely possible. Common sense says this cycle,
this horrible cycle of hostility must end and ideally will end soon. Good for
both countries.

Some say the Russians won’t be reasonable. I intend to find out. If we can’t
make a deal under my administration, a deal that’s great — not good, great —
for America, but also good for Russia, then we will quickly walk from the
table. It’s as simple as that. We’re going to find out.

Fixing our relations with China is another important step — and really toward
creating an even more prosperous period of time. China respects strength and by
letting them take advantage of us economically, which they are doing like never
before, we have lost all of their respect.

We have a massive trade deficit with China, a deficit that we have to find a
way quickly, and I mean quickly, to balance. A strong and smart America is an
America that will find a better friend in China, better than we have right now.
Look at what China is doing in the South China Sea. They’re not supposed to be
doing it.

No respect for this country or this president. We can both benefit or we can
both go our separate ways. If need be, that’s what’s going to have to happen.

After I’m elected president, I will also call for a summit with our NATO allies
and a separate summit with our Asian allies. In these summits, we will not only
discuss a rebalancing of financial commitments, but take a fresh look at how we
can adopt new strategies for tackling our common challenges. For instance, we
will discuss how we can upgrade NATO’s outdated mission and structure, grown
out of the Cold War to confront our shared challenges, including migration and
Islamic terrorism.

I will not hesitate to deploy military force when there is no alternative. But
if America fights, it must only fight to win.

I will never sent our finest into battle unless necessary, and I mean
absolutely necessary, and will only do so if we have a plan for victory with a
capital V.

Our goal is peace and prosperity, not war and destruction. The best way to
achieve those goals is through a disciplined, deliberate and consistent foreign
policy. With President Obama and Secretary Clinton we’ve had the exact opposite
— a reckless, rudderless and aimless foreign policy, one that has blazed the
path of destruction in its wake.

After losing thousands of lives and spending trillions of dollars, we are in
far worst shape in the Middle East than ever, ever before. I challenge anyone
to explain the strategic foreign policy vision of Obama/Clinton. It has been a
complete and total disaster.

I will also be prepared to deploy America’s economic resources. Financial
leverage and sanctions can be very, very persuasive, but we need to use them
selectively and with total determination. Our power will be used if others do
not play by the rules. In other words, if they do not treat us fairly. Our
friends and enemies must know that if I draw a line in the sand, I will enforce
that line in the sand. Believe me.

However, unlike other candidates for the presidency, war and aggression will
not be my first instinct. You cannot have a foreign policy without diplomacy. A
superpower understands that caution and restraint are really truly signs of
strength. Although not in government service, I was totally against the war in
Iraq, very proudly, saying for many years that it would destabilize the Middle
East. Sadly, I was correct, and the biggest beneficiary has been has been Iran,
who is systematically taking over Iraq and gaining access to their very rich
oil reserves, something it has wanted to do for decades.

And now, to top it off, we have ISIS. My goal is to establish a foreign policy
that will endure for several generations. That’s why I also look and have to
look for talented experts with approaches and practical ideas, rather than
surrounding myself with those who have perfect résumés but very little to brag
about except responsibility for a long history of failed policies and continued
losses at war. We have to look to new people.

We have to look to new people because many of the old people frankly don’t know
what they’re doing, even though they may look awfully good writing in The New
York Times or being watched on television.

Finally, I will work with our allies to reinvigorate Western values and
institutions. Instead of trying to spread universal values that not everybody
shares or wants, we should understand that strengthening and promoting Western
civilization and its accomplishments will do more to inspire positive reforms
around the world than military interventions.

These are my goals as president. I will seek a foreign policy that all
Americans, whatever their party, can support, so important, and which our
friends and allies will respect and totally welcome. The world must know that
we do not go abroad in search of enemies, that we are always happy when old
enemies become friends and when old friends become allies, that’s what we want.
We want them to be our allies.

We want the world to be — we want to bring peace to the world. Too much
destruction out there, too many destructive weapons. The power of weaponry is
the single biggest problem that we have today in the world.

To achieve these goals, Americans must have confidence in their country and its
leadership. Again, many Americans must wonder why we our politicians seem more
interested in defending the borders of foreign countries than in defending
their own. Americans.

Americans must know that we’re putting the American people first again on
trade.

So true. On trade, on immigration, on foreign policy. The jobs, incomes and
security of the American worker will always be my first priority.

No country has ever prospered that failed to put its own interests first. Both
our friends and our enemies put their countries above ours and we, while being
fair to them, must start doing the same. We will no longer surrender this
country or its people to the false song of globalism. The nation-state remains
the true foundation for happiness and harmony. I am skeptical of international
unions that tie us up and bring America down and will never enter.

And under my administration, we will never enter America into any agreement
that reduces our ability to control our own affairs.

NAFTA, as an example, has been a total disaster for the United States and has
emptied our states — literally emptied our states of our manufacturing and our
jobs. And I’ve just gotten to see it. I’ve toured Pennsylvania. I’ve toured New
York. I’ve toured so many of the states. They have been cleaned out. Their
manufacturing is gone.

Never again, only the reverse — and I have to say this strongly — never again;
only the reverse will happen. We will keep our jobs and bring in new ones.
There will be consequences for the companies that leave the United States only
to exploit it later. They fire the people. They take advantage of the United
States. There will be consequences for those companies. Never again.

Under a Trump administration, no American citizen will ever again feel that
their needs come second to the citizens of a foreign country.

I will view as president the world through the clear lens of American
interests. I will be America’s greatest defender and most loyal champion. We
will not apologize for becoming successful again, but will instead embrace the
unique heritage that makes us who we are.

The world is most peaceful and most prosperous when America is strongest.
America will continue and continue forever to play the role of peacemaker. We
will always help save lives and indeed humanity itself, but to play the role,
we must make America strong again.

And always — always, always, we must make, and we have to look at it from every
angle, and we have no choice, we must make America respected again. We must
make America truly wealthy again. And we must — we have to and we will make
America great again. And if we do that — and if we do that, perhaps this
century can be the most peaceful and prosperous the world has ever, ever known.

It is great to be here. I'd like to thank Alumisource and all the amazing
workers here for hosting us.

Today, I am going to talk about how to Make America Wealthy Again.

We are thirty miles from Steel City. Pittsburgh played a central role in
building our nation.

The legacy of Pennsylvania steelworkers lives in the bridges, railways and
skyscrapers that make up our great American landscape.

But our workers' loyalty was repaid with betrayal.

Our politicians have aggressively pursued a policy of globalization - moving
our jobs, our wealth and our factories to Mexico and overseas.

Globalization has made the financial elite who donate to politicians very
wealthy. But it has left millions of our workers with nothing but poverty and
heartache.

When subsidized foreign steel is dumped into our markets, threatening our
factories, the politicians do nothing.

For years, they watched on the sidelines as our jobs vanished and our
communities were plunged into depression-level unemployment.

Many of these areas have still never recovered.

Our politicians took away from the people their means of making a living and
supporting their families.

Skilled craftsmen and tradespeople and factory workers have seen the jobs they
loved shipped thousands of miles away.

Many Pennsylvania towns once thriving and humming are now in a state despair.

This wave of globalization has wiped out our middle class.

It doesn't have to be this way. We can turn it all around - and we can turn it
around fast.

But if we're going to deliver real change, we're going to have to reject the
campaign of fear and intimidation being pushed by powerful corporations, media
elites, and political dynasties.

The people who rigged the system for their benefit will do anything - and say
anything - to keep things exactly as they are.

The people who rigged the system are supporting Hillary Clinton because they
know as long as she is in charge nothing will ever change.

The inner cities will remain poor.

The factories will remain closed.

The borders will remain open.

The special interests will remain firmly in control.

Hillary Clinton and her friends in global finance want to scare America into
thinking small - and they want to scare the American people out of voting for a
better future.

My campaign has the opposite message.

I want you to imagine how much better your life can be if we start believing in
America again.

I want you to imagine how much better our future can be if we declare
independence from the elites who've led us to one financial and foreign policy
disaster after another.

Our friends in Britain recently voted to take back control of their economy,
politics and borders.

I was on the right side of that issue - with the people - while Hillary, as
always, stood with the elites, and both she and president Obama predicted that
one wrong.

Now it's time for the American people to take back their future.

That's the choice we face. We can either give in to Hillary Clinton's campaign
of fear, or we can choose to Believe In America.

We lost our way when we stopped believing in our country.

America became the world's dominant economy by becoming the world's dominant
producer.

The wealth this created was shared broadly, creating the biggest middle class
the world had ever known.

But then America changed its policy from promoting development in America, to
promoting development in other nations.

We allowed foreign countries to subsidize their goods, devalue their
currencies, violate their agreements, and cheat in every way imaginable.

Trillions of our dollars and millions of our jobs flowed overseas as a result.

I have visited cities and towns across this country where a third or even half
of manufacturing jobs have been wiped out in the last 20 years.

Today, we import nearly $800 billion more in goods than we export.

This is not some natural disaster. It is politician-made disaster.

It is the consequence of a leadership class that worships globalism over
Americanism.

This is a direct affront to our Founding Fathers, who wanted America to be
strong, independent and free.

Our Founding Fathers Understood Trade

George Washington said that "the promotion of domestic manufactur[ing] will be
among the first consequences to flow from an energetic government.”

Alexander Hamilton spoke frequently of the "expediency of encouraging
manufactur[ing] in the United States." The first Republican President, Abraham
Lincoln, warned that: "The abandonment of the protective policy by the American
government… must produce want and ruin among our people."

Our original Constitution did not even have an income tax. Instead, it had
tariffs - emphasizing taxation of foreign, not domestic, production.

Yet today, 240 years after the Revolution, we have turned things completely
upside-down.

We tax and regulate and restrict our companies to death, then we allow foreign
countries that cheat to export their goods to us tax-free.

As a result, we have become more dependent on foreign countries than ever
before.

Ladies and Gentlemen, it’s time to declare our economic independence once
again.

That means reversing two of the worst legacies of the Clinton years.

America has lost nearly one-third of its manufacturing jobs since 1997 - even
as the country has increased its population by 50 million people.

At the center of this catastrophe are two trade deals pushed by Bill and
Hillary Clinton.

First, the North American Free Trade Agreement, or NAFTA. Second, China's entry
into the World Trade Organization.

NAFTA was the worst trade deal in history, and China's entrance into the World
Trade Organization has enabled the greatest jobs theft in history.

It was Bill Clinton who signed NAFTA in 1993, and Hillary Clinton who supported
it.

It was also Bill Clinton who lobbied for China's disastrous entry into the
World Trade Organization, and Hillary Clinton who backed that terrible
agreement.

Then, as Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton stood by idly while China cheated
on its currency, added another trillion dollars to our trade deficits, and
stole hundreds of billions of dollars in our intellectual property.

The city of Pittsburgh, and the State of Pennsylvania, have lost one-third of
their manufacturing jobs since the Clintons put China into the WTO.

Fifty thousand factories across America have shut their doors in that time.

Almost half of our entire manufacturing trade deficit in goods with the world
is the result of trade with China.

It was also Hillary Clinton, as Secretary of State, who shoved us into a
job-killing deal with South Korea in 2012.

As reported by the Economic Policy Institute in May, this deal doubled our
trade deficit with South Korea and destroyed nearly 100,000 American jobs.

As Bernie Sanders said, Hillary Clinton "Voted for virtually every trade
agreement that has cost the workers of this country millions of jobs.”

Trade reform, and the negotiation of great trade deals, is the quickest way to
bring our jobs back.

To understand why trade reform creates jobs, we need to understand how all
nations grow and prosper.

Massive trade deficits subtract directly from our Gross Domestic Product.

From 1947 to 2001 - a span of over five decades - our inflation-adjusted gross
domestic product grew at a rate of 3.5%.

However, since 2002 - the year after we fully opened our markets to Chinese
imports - that GDP growth rate has been cut almost in half.

What does this mean for Americans? For every one percent of GDP growth we fail
to generate in any given year, we also fail to create over one million jobs.

America's "job creation deficit" due to slower growth since 2002 is well over
20 million jobs - and that's just about the number of jobs our country needs
right now to put America back to work at decent wages.

The Transpacific-Partnership is the greatest danger yet.

The TPP would be the death blow for American manufacturing.

It would give up all of our economic leverage to an international commission
that would put the interests of foreign countries above our own.

It would further open our markets to aggressive currency cheaters. It would
make it easier for our trading competitors to ship cheap subsidized goods into
U.S. markets - while allowing foreign countries to continue putting barriers in
front of our exports.

The TPP would lower tariffs on foreign cars, while leaving in place the foreign
practices that keep American cars from being sold overseas. The TPP even
created a backdoor for China to supply car parts for automobiles made in
Mexico.

The agreement would also force American workers to compete directly against
workers from Vietnam, one of the lowest wage countries on Earth.

Not only will the TPP undermine our economy, but it will undermine our
independence.

The TPP creates a new international commission that makes decisions the
American people can't veto.

These commissions are great Hillary Clinton’s Wall Street funders who can spend
vast amounts of money to influence the outcomes.

It should be no surprise then that Hillary Clinton, according to Bloomberg,
took a “leading part in drafting the Trans-Pacific Partnership”.

She praised or pushed the TPP on 45 separate occasions, and even called it the
“gold standard”.

Hillary Clinton was totally for the TPP just a short while ago, but when she
saw my stance, which is totally against, she was shamed into saying she would
be against it too – but have no doubt, she will immediately approve it if it is
put before her, guaranteed.

She will do this just as she has betrayed American workers for Wall Street
throughout her career.

Here’s how it would go: she would make a small token change, declare the pact
fixed, and ram it through.

That’s why Hillary is now only saying she has problems with the TPP “in its
current form,” – ensuring that she can rush to embrace it again at her earliest
opportunity.

If the media doesn’t believe me, I have a challenge for you. Ask Hillary
Clinton if she is willing to withdraw from the TPP her first day in office and
unconditionally rule out its passage in any form.

There is no way to “fix” the TPP. We need bilateral trade deals. We do not need
to enter into another massive international agreement that ties us up and binds
us down.

A Trump Administration will change our failed trade policy - quickly

Here are 7 steps I would pursue right away to bring back our jobs.

One: I am going to withdraw the United States from the Trans-Pacific
Partnership, which has not yet been ratified.

Two: I'm going to appoint the toughest and smartest trade negotiators to fight
on behalf of American workers.

Three: I'm going to direct the Secretary of Commerce to identify every
violation of trade agreements a foreign country is currently using to harm our
workers. I will then direct all appropriate agencies to use every tool under
American and international law to end these abuses.

Four: I'm going tell our NAFTA partners that I intend to immediately
renegotiate the terms of that agreement to get a better deal for our workers.
And I don't mean just a little bit better, I mean a lot better. If they do not
agree to a renegotiation, then I will submit notice under Article 2205 of the
NAFTA agreement that America intends to withdraw from the deal.

Five: I am going to instruct my Treasury Secretary to label China a currency
manipulator. Any country that devalues their currency in order to take
advantage of the United States will be met with sharply

Six: I am going to instruct the U.S. Trade Representative to bring trade cases
against China, both in this country and at the WTO. China's unfair subsidy
behavior is prohibited by the terms of its entrance to the WTO, and I intend to
enforce those rules.

Seven: If China does not stop its illegal activities, including its theft of
American trade secrets, I will use every lawful presidential power to remedy
trade disputes, including the application of tariffs consistent with Section
201 and 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 and Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act
of 1962.

President Reagan deployed similar trade measures when motorcycle and
semiconductor imports threatened U.S. industry. His tariff on Japanese
motorcycles was 45% and his tariff to shield America’s semiconductor industry
was 100%.

Hillary Clinton, and her campaign of fear, will try to spread the lie that
these actions will start a trade war. She has it completely backwards.

Hillary Clinton unleashed a trade war against the American worker when she
supported one terrible trade deal after another – from NAFTA to China to South
Korea.

A Trump Administration will end that war by getting a fair deal for the
American people.

The era of economic surrender will finally be over.

A new era of prosperity will finally begin.

America will be independent once more.

Under a Trump Presidency, the American worker will finally have a President who
will protect them and fight for them.

We will stand up to trade cheating anywhere and everywhere it threatens an
American job.

We will make America the best place in the world to start a business, hire
workers, and open a factory.

This includes massive tax reform to lift the crushing burdens on American
workers and businesses.

We will also get rid of wasteful rules and regulations which are destroying our
job creation capacity.

Many people think that these regulations are an even greater impediment than
the fact that we are one of the highest taxed nations in the world.

We are also going to fully capture America’s tremendous energy capacity. This
will create vast profits for our workers and begin reducing our deficit.
Hillary Clinton wants to shut down energy production and shut down the mines.

A Trump Administration will also ensure that we start using American steel for
American infrastructure.

Just like the American steel from Pennsylvania that built the Empire State
building.

It will be American steel that will fortify American's crumbling bridges.

It will be American steel that sends our skyscrapers soaring into the sky.

It will be American steel that rebuilds our inner cities.

It will be American hands that remake this country, and it will be American
energy - mined from American resources - that powers this country.

It will be American workers who are hired to do the job.

We are going to put American-produced steel back into the backbone of our
country. This alone will create massive numbers of jobs.

On trade, on immigration, on foreign policy, we are going to put America First
again.

We are going to make America wealthy again.

We are going to reject Hillary Clinton's politics of fear, futility, and
incompetence.

We are going to embrace the possibilities of change.

It is time to believe in the future.

It is time to believe in each other.

It is time to Believe In America.

This Is How We Are Going To Make America Great Again – For All Americans.

We Are Going To Make America Great Again For Everyone – Greater Than Ever
Before.

Wow. Whoa. That is some group of people. Thousands.

So nice, thank you very much. That’s really nice. Thank you. It’s great to be
at Trump Tower. It’s great to be in a wonderful city, New York. And it’s an
honor to have everybody here. This is beyond anybody’s expectations. There’s
been no crowd like this.

And, I can tell, some of the candidates, they went in. They didn’t know the
air-conditioner didn’t work. They sweated like dogs.

They didn’t know the room was too big, because they didn’t have anybody there.
How are they going to beat ISIS? I don’t think it’s gonna happen.

Our country is in serious trouble. We don’t have victories anymore. We used to
have victories, but we don’t have them. When was the last time anybody saw us
beating, let’s say, China in a trade deal? They kill us. I beat China all the
time. All the time.

When did we beat Japan at anything? They send their cars over by the millions,
and what do we do? When was the last time you saw a Chevrolet in Tokyo? It
doesn’t exist, folks. They beat us all the time.

When do we beat Mexico at the border? They’re laughing at us, at our stupidity.
And now they are beating us economically. They are not our friend, believe me.
But they’re killing us economically.

The U.S. has become a dumping ground for everybody else’s problems.

Thank you. It’s true, and these are the best and the finest. When Mexico sends
its people, they’re not sending their best. They’re not sending you. They’re
not sending you. They’re sending people that have lots of problems, and they’re
bringing those problems with us. They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing
crime. They’re rapists. And some, I assume, are good people.

But I speak to border guards and they tell us what we’re getting. And it only
makes common sense. It only makes common sense. They’re sending us not the
right people.

It’s coming from more than Mexico. It’s coming from all over South and Latin
America, and it’s coming probably — probably — from the Middle East. But we
don’t know. Because we have no protection and we have no competence, we don’t
know what’s happening. And it’s got to stop and it’s got to stop fast.

Islamic terrorism is eating up large portions of the Middle East. They’ve
become rich. I’m in competition with them.

They just built a hotel in Syria. Can you believe this? They built a hotel.
When I have to build a hotel, I pay interest. They don’t have to pay interest,
because they took the oil that, when we left Iraq, I said we should’ve taken.

So now ISIS has the oil, and what they don’t have, Iran has. And in 19 — and I
will tell you this, and I said it very strongly, years ago, I said — and I love
the military, and I want to have the strongest military that we’ve ever had,
and we need it more now than ever. But I said, “Don’t hit Iraq,” because you’re
going to totally destabilize the Middle East. Iran is going to take over the
Middle East, Iran and somebody else will get the oil, and it turned out that
Iran is now taking over Iraq. Think of it. Iran is taking over Iraq, and
they’re taking it over big league.

We spent $2 trillion in Iraq, $2 trillion. We lost thousands of lives,
thousands in Iraq. We have wounded soldiers, who I love, I love — they’re great
— all over the place, thousands and thousands of wounded soldiers.

And we have nothing. We can’t even go there. We have nothing. And every time we
give Iraq equipment, the first time a bullet goes off in the air, they leave
it.

Last week, I read 2,300 Humvees — these are big vehicles — were left behind for
the enemy. 2,000? You would say maybe two, maybe four? 2,300 sophisticated
vehicles, they ran, and the enemy took them.

Last quarter, it was just announced our gross domestic product — a sign of
strength, right? But not for us. It was below zero. Whoever heard of this? It’s
never below zero.

Our labor participation rate was the worst since 1978. But think of it, GDP
below zero, horrible labor participation rate.

And our real unemployment is anywhere from 18 to 20 percent. Don’t believe the
5.6. Don’t believe it.

That’s right. A lot of people up there can’t get jobs. They can’t get jobs,
because there are no jobs, because China has our jobs and Mexico has our jobs.
They all have jobs.

But the real number, the real number is anywhere from 18 to 19 and maybe even
21 percent, and nobody talks about it, because it’s a statistic that’s full of
nonsense.

Our enemies are getting stronger and stronger by the way, and we as a country
are getting weaker. Even our nuclear arsenal doesn’t work.

It came out recently they have equipment that is 30 years old. They don’t know
if it worked. And I thought it was horrible when it was broadcast on
television, because boy, does that send signals to Putin and all of the other
people that look at us and they say, “That is a group of people, and that is a
nation that truly has no clue. They don’t know what they’re doing. They don’t
know what they’re doing.”

We have a disaster called the big lie: Obamacare. Obamacare.

Yesterday, it came out that costs are going for people up 29, 39, 49, and even
55 percent, and deductibles are through the roof. You have to be hit by a
tractor, literally, a tractor, to use it, because the deductibles are so high,
it’s virtually useless. It’s virtually useless. It is a disaster. And
remember the $5 billion Web site? $5 billion we spent on a Web site, and to
this day it doesn’t work. A $5 billion Web site.

I have so many Web sites, I have them all over the place. I hire people, they
do a Web site. It costs me $3. $5 billion Web site.

Well, you need somebody, because politicians are all talk, no action. Nothing’s
gonna get done. They will not bring us — believe me — to the promised land.
They will not.

As an example, I’ve been on the circuit making speeches, and I hear my fellow
Republicans. And they’re wonderful people. I like them. They all want me to
support them. They don’t know how to bring it about. They come up to my office.
I’m meeting with three of them in the next week. And they don’t know — “Are you
running? Are you not running? Could we have your support? What do we do? How do
we do it?”

I like them. And I hear their speeches. And they don’t talk jobs and they don’t
talk China. When was the last time you heard China is killing us? They’re
devaluing their currency to a level that you wouldn’t believe. It makes it
impossible for our companies to compete, impossible. They’re killing us.

But you don’t hear that from anybody else. You don’t hear it from anybody else.
And I watch the speeches.

I watch the speeches of these people, and they say the sun will rise, the moon
will set, all sorts of wonderful things will happen. And people are saying,
“What’s going on? I just want a job. Just get me a job. I don’t need the
rhetoric. I want a job.”

And that’s what’s happening. And it’s going to get worse, because remember,
Obamacare really kicks in in ’16, 2016. Obama is going to be out playing golf.
He might be on one of my courses. I would invite him, I actually would say. I
have the best courses in the world, so I’d say, you what, if he wants to — I
have one right next to the White House, right on the Potomac. If he’d like to
play, that’s fine.

In fact, I’d love him to leave early and play, that would be a very good thing.

But Obamacare kicks in in 2016. Really big league. It is going to be amazingly
destructive. Doctors are quitting. I have a friend who’s a doctor, and he said
to me the other day, “Donald, I never saw anything like it. I have more
accountants than I have nurses. It’s a disaster. My patients are beside
themselves. They had a plan that was good. They have no plan now.”

We have to repeal Obamacare, and it can be — and — and it can be replaced with
something much better for everybody. Let it be for everybody. But much better
and much less expensive for people and for the government. And we can do it.

So I’ve watched the politicians. I’ve dealt with them all my life. If you can’t
make a good deal with a politician, then there’s something wrong with you.
You’re certainly not very good. And that’s what we have= representing us. They
will never make America great again. They don’t even have a chance. They’re
controlled fully — they’re controlled fully by the lobbyists, by the donors,
and by the special interests, fully.

Yes, they control them. Hey, I have lobbyists. I have to tell you. I have
lobbyists that can produce anything for me. They’re great. But you know what?
it won’t happen. It won’t happen. Because we have to stop doing things for some
people, but for this country, it’s destroying our country. We have to stop, and
it has to stop now.

Now, our country needs — our country needs a truly great leader, and we need a
truly great leader now. We need a leader that wrote “The Art of the Deal.”

We need a leader that can bring back our jobs, can bring back our
manufacturing, can bring back our military, can take care of our vets. Our vets
have been abandoned.

And we also need a cheerleader.

You know, when President Obama was elected, I said, “Well, the one thing, I
think he’ll do well. I think he’ll be a great cheerleader for the country. I
think he’d be a great spirit.”

He was vibrant. He was young. I really thought that he would be a great
cheerleader.

He’s not a leader. That’s true. You’re right about that.

But he wasn’t a cheerleader. He’s actually a negative force. He’s been a
negative force. He wasn’t a cheerleader; he was the opposite.

We need somebody that can take the brand of the United States and make it great
again. It’s not great again.

We need — we need somebody — we need somebody that literally will take this
country and make it great again. We can do that.

And, I will tell you, I love my life. I have a wonderful family. They’re
saying, “Dad, you’re going to do something that’s going to be so tough.”

You know, all of my life, I’ve heard that a truly successful person, a really,
really successful person and even modestly successful cannot run for public
office. Just can’t happen. And yet that’s the kind of mindset that you need to
make this country great again.

So ladies and gentlemen…

I am officially running…

… for president of the United States, and we are going to make our country
great again.

It can happen. Our country has tremendous potential. We have tremendous people.

We have people that aren’t working. We have people that have no incentive to
work. But they’re going to have incentive to work, because the greatest social
program is a job. And they’ll be proud, and they’ll love it, and they’ll make
much more than they would’ve ever made, and they’ll be — they’ll be doing so
well, and we’re going to be thriving as a country, thriving. It can happen.

I will be the greatest jobs president that God ever created. I tell you that.

I’ll bring back our jobs from China, from Mexico, from Japan, from so many
places. I’ll bring back our jobs, and I’ll bring back our money.

Right now, think of this: We owe China $1.3 trillion. We owe Japan more than
that. So they come in, they take our jobs, they take our money, and then they
loan us back the money, and we pay them in interest, and then the dollar goes
up so their deal’s even better.

How stupid are our leaders? How stupid are these politicians to allow this to
happen? How stupid are they?

I’m going to tell you — thank you. I’m going to tell you a couple of stories
about trade, because I’m totally against the trade bill for a number of
reasons.

Number one, the people negotiating don’t have a clue. Our president doesn’t
have a clue. He’s a bad negotiator.

He’s the one that did Bergdahl. We get Bergdahl, they get five killer
terrorists that everybody wanted over there.

We get Bergdahl. We get a traitor. We get a no-good traitor, and they get the
five people that they wanted for years, and those people are now back on the
battlefield trying to kill us. That’s the negotiator we have.

Take a look at the deal he’s making with Iran. He makes that deal, Israel maybe
won’t exist very long. It’s a disaster, and we have to protect Israel. But…

So we need people — I’m a free trader. But the problem with free trade is you
need really talented people to negotiate for you. If you don’t have talented
people, if you don’t have great leadership, if you don’t have people that know
business, not just a political hack that got the job because he made a
contribution to a campaign, which is the way all jobs, just about, are gotten,
free trade terrible.

Free trade can be wonderful if you have smart people, but we have people that
are stupid. We have people that aren’t smart. And we have people that are
controlled by special interests. And it’s just not going to work.

So, here’s a couple of stories happened recently. A friend of mine is a great
manufacturer. And, you know, China comes over and they dump all their stuff,
and I buy it. I buy it, because, frankly, I have an obligation to buy it,
because they devalue their currency so brilliantly, they just did it recently,
and nobody thought they could do it again.

But with all our problems with Russia, with all our problems with everything —
everything, they got away with it again. And it’s impossible for our people
here to compete.

So I want to tell you this story. A friend of mine who’s a great manufacturer,
calls me up a few weeks ago. He’s very upset. I said, “What’s your problem?”

He said, “You know, I make great product.”

And I said, “I know. I know that because I buy the product.”

He said, “I can’t get it into China. They won’t accept it. I sent a boat over
and they actually sent it back. They talked about environmental, they talked
about all sorts of crap that had nothing to do with it.”

I said, “Oh, wait a minute, that’s terrible. Does anyone know this?”

He said, “Yeah, they do it all the time with other people.”

I said, “They send it back?”

“Yeah. So I finally got it over there and they charged me a big tariff. They’re
not supposed to be doing that. I told them.”

Now, they do charge you tariff on trucks, when we send trucks and other things
over there.

Ask Boeing. They wanted Boeing’s secrets. They wanted their patents and all
their secrets before they agreed to buy planes from Boeing.

Hey, I’m not saying they’re stupid. I like China. I sell apartments for — I
just sold an apartment for $15 million to somebody from China. Am I supposed to
dislike them? I own a big chunk of the Bank of America Building at 1290 Avenue
of the Americas, that I got from China in a war. Very valuable.

I love China. The biggest bank in the world is from China. You know where their
United States headquarters is located? In this building, in Trump Tower. I love
China. People say, “Oh, you don’t like China?”

No, I love them. But their leaders are much smarter than our leaders, and we
can’t sustain ourself with that. There’s too much — it’s like — it’s like take
the New England Patriots and Tom Brady and have them play your high school
football team. That’s the difference between China’s leaders and our leaders.

They are ripping us. We are rebuilding China. We’re rebuilding many countries.
China, you go there now, roads, bridges, schools, you never saw anything like
it. They have bridges that make the George Washington Bridge look like small
potatoes. And they’re all over the place.

We have all the cards, but we don’t know how to use them. We don’t even know
that we have the cards, because our leaders don’t understand the game. We could
turn off that spigot by charging them tax until they behave properly.

Now they’re going militarily. They’re building a military island in the middle
of the South China sea. A military island. Now, our country could never do that
because we’d have to get environmental clearance, and the environmentalist
wouldn’t let our country — we would never build in an ocean. They built it in
about one year, this massive military port.

They’re building up their military to a point that is very scary. You have a
problem with ISIS. You have a bigger problem with China.

And, in my opinion, the new China, believe it or not, in terms of trade, is
Mexico.

So this man tells me about the manufacturing. I say, “That’s a terrible story.
I hate to hear it.”

But I have another one, Ford.

So Mexico takes a company, a car company that was going to build in Tennessee,
rips it out. Everybody thought the deal was dead. Reported it in the Wall
Street Journal recently. Everybody thought it was a done deal. It’s going in
and that’s going to be it, going into Tennessee. Great state, great people.

All of a sudden, at the last moment, this big car manufacturer, foreign,
announces they’re not going to Tennessee. They’re gonna spend their $1 billion
in Mexico instead. Not good.

Now, Ford announces a few weeks ago that Ford is going to build a $2.5 billion
car and truck and parts manufacturing plant in Mexico. $2.5 billion, it’s going
to be one of the largest in the world. Ford. Good company.

So I announced that I’m running for president. I would…

… one of the early things I would do, probably before I even got in — and I
wouldn’t even use — you know, I have — I know the smartest negotiators in the
world. I know the good ones. I know the bad ones. I know the overrated ones.

You get a lot of them that are overrated. They’re not good. They think they
are. They get good stories, because the newspapers get buffaloed (ph). But
they’re not good.

But I know the negotiators in the world, and I put them one for each country.
Believe me, folks. We will do very, very well, very, very well.

But I wouldn’t even waste my time with this one. I would call up the head of
Ford, who I know. If I was president, I’d say, “Congratulations. I understand
that you’re building a nice $2.5 billion car factory in Mexico and that you’re
going to take your cars and sell them to the United States zero tax, just flow
them across the border.”

And you say to yourself, “How does that help us,” right? “How does that help
us? Where is that good”? It’s not.

So I would say, “Congratulations. That’s the good news. Let me give you the bad
news. Every car and every truck and every part manufactured in this plant that
comes across the border, we’re going to charge you a 35-percent tax, and that
tax is going to be paid simultaneously with the transaction, and that’s it.

Now, here’s what is going to happen. If it’s not me in the position, it’s one
of these politicians that we’re running against, you know, the 400 people that
we’re (inaudible). And here’s what’s going to happen. They’re not so stupid.
They know it’s not a good thing, and they may even be upset by it. But then
they’re going to get a call from the donors or probably from the lobbyist for
Ford and say, “You can’t do that to Ford, because Ford takes care of me and I
take care of you, and you can’t do that to Ford.”

And guess what? No problem. They’re going to build in Mexico. They’re going to
take away thousands of jobs. It’s very bad for us.

So under President Trump, here’s what would happen:

The head of Ford will call me back, I would say within an hour after I told
them the bad news. But it could be he’d want to be cool, and he’ll wait until
the next day. You know, they want to be a little cool.

And he’ll say, “Please, please, please.” He’ll beg for a little while, and I’ll
say, “No interest.” Then he’ll call all sorts of political people, and I’ll
say, “Sorry, fellas. No interest,” because I don’t need anybody’s money. It’s
nice. I don’t need anybody’s money.

I’m using my own money. I’m not using the lobbyists. I’m not using donors. I
don’t care. I’m really rich.

And by the way, I’m not even saying that in a — that’s the kind of mindset,
that’s the kind of thinking you need for this country.

So — because we got to make the country rich.

It sounds crass. Somebody said, “Oh, that’s crass.” It’s not crass.

We got $18 trillion in debt. We got nothing but problems.

We got a military that needs equipment all over the place. We got nuclear
weapons that are obsolete.

We’ve got nothing. We’ve got Social Security that’s going to be destroyed if
somebody like me doesn’t bring money into the country. All these other people
want to cut the hell out of it. I’m not going to cut it at all; I’m going to
bring money in, and we’re going to save it.

But here’s what’s going to happen:

After I’m called by 30 friends of mine who contributed to different campaigns,
after I’m called by all of the special interests and by the — the donors and by
the lobbyists — and they have zero chance at convincing me, zero — I’ll get a
call the next day from the head of Ford. He’ll say. “Please reconsider,” I’ll
say no.

He’ll say, “Mr. President, we’ve decided to move the plant back to the United
States, and we’re not going to build it in Mexico.” That’s it. They have no
choice. They have no choice.

There are hundreds of things like that. I’ll give you another example.
Saudi Arabia, they make $1 billion a day. $1 billion a day. I love the Saudis.
Many are in this building. They make a billion dollars a day. Whenever they
have problems, we send over the ships. We say “we’re gonna protect.” What are
we doing? They’ve got nothing but money.

If the right person asked them, they’d pay a fortune. They wouldn’t be there
except for us.

And believe me, you look at the border with Yemen. You remember Obama a year
ago, Yemen was a great victory. Two weeks later, the place was blown up.
Everybody got out — and they kept our equipment.

They always keep our equipment. We ought to send used equipment, right? They
always keep our equipment. We ought to send some real junk, because, frankly,
it would be — we ought to send our surplus. We’re always losing this gorgeous
brand-new stuff.

But look at that border with Saudi Arabia. Do you really think that these
people are interested in Yemen? Saudi Arabia without us is gone. They;re gone.

And I’m the one that made all of the right predictions about Iraq. You know,
all of these politicians that I’m running against now — it’s so nice to say I’m
running as opposed to if I run, if I run. I’m running.

But all of these politicians that I’m running against now, they’re trying to
disassociate. I mean, you looked at Bush, it took him five days to answer the
question on Iraq. He couldn’t answer the question. He didn’t know. I said, “Is
he intelligent?”

Then I looked at Rubio. He was unable to answer the question, is Iraq a good
thing or bad thing? He didn’t know. He couldn’t answer the question.

How are these people gonna lead us? How are we gonna — how are we gonna go back
and make it great again? We can’t. They don’t have a clue. They can’t lead us.
They can’t. They can’t even answer simple questions. It was terrible.

But Saudi Arabia is in big, big trouble. Now, thanks to fracking and other
things, the oil is all over the place. And I used to say it, there are ships at
sea, and this was during the worst crisis, that were loaded up with oil, and
the cartel kept the price up, because, again, they were smarter than our
leaders. They were smarter than our leaders.

There is so much wealth out there that can make our country so rich again, and
therefore make it great again. Because we need money. We’re dying. We’re dying.
We need money. We have to do it. And we need the right people.

So Ford will come back. They’ll all come back. And I will say this, this is
going to be an election, in my opinion, that’s based on competence.

That’s true. But actually I am. I think I am a nice person. People that know
me, like me. Does my family like me? I think so, right. Look at my family. I’m
proud of my family.

By the way, speaking of my family, Melania, Barron, Kai, Donnie, Don, Vanessa,
Tiffany, Evanka did a great job. Did she do a great job?

Great. Jared, Laura and Eric, I’m very proud of my family. They’re a great
family.

So the reporter said to me the other day, “But, Mr. Trump, you’re not a nice
person. How can you get people to vote for you?”

I said, “I don’t know.” I said, “I think that number one, I am a nice person. I
give a lot of money away to charities and other things. I think I’m actually a
very nice person.”

But, I said, “This is going to be an election that’s based on competence,
because people are tired of these nice people. And they’re tired of being
ripped off by everybody in the world. And they’re tired of spending more money
on education than any nation in the world per capita, than any nation in the
world, and we are 26th in the world, 25 countries are better than us in
education. And some of them are like third world countries. But we’re becoming
a third word country, because of our infrastructure, our airports, our roads,
everything. So one of the things I did, and I said, you know what I’ll do. I’ll
do it. Because a lot of people said, “He’ll never run. Number one, he won’t
want to give up his lifestyle.”

They’re right about that, but I’m doing it.

Number two, I’m a private company, so nobody knows what I’m worth. And the one
thing is that when you run, you have to announce and certify to all sorts of
governmental authorities your net worth.

So I said, “That’s OK.” I’m proud of my net worth. I’ve done an amazing job.

I started off — thank you — I started off in a small office with my father in
Brooklyn and Queens, and my father said — and I love my father. I learned so
much. He was a great negotiator. I learned so much just sitting at his feet
playing with blocks listening to him negotiate with subcontractors. But I
learned a lot.

But he used to say, “Donald, don’t go into Manhattan. That’s the big leagues.
We don’t know anything about that. Don’t do it.”

I said, “I gotta go into Manhattan. I gotta build those big buildings. I gotta
do it, Dad. I’ve gotta do it.”

And after four or five years in Brooklyn, I ventured into Manhattan and did a
lot of great deals — the Grand Hyatt Hotel. I was responsible for the
convention center on the west side. I did a lot of great deals, and I did them
early and young. And now I’m building all over the world, and I love what I’m
doing.

But they all said, a lot of the pundits on television, “Well, Donald will never
run, and one of the main reasons is he’s private and he’s probably not as
successful as everybody thinks.”

So I said to myself, you know, nobody’s ever going to know unless I run,
because I’m really proud of my success. I really am.

I’ve employed — I’ve employed tens of thousands of people over my lifetime.
That means medical. That means education. That means everything.

So a large accounting firm and my accountants have been working for months,
because it’s big and complex, and they’ve put together a statement, a financial
statement, just a summary. But everything will be filed eventually with the
government, and we don’t extensions or anything. We’ll be filing it right on
time. We don’t need anything.

And it was even reported incorrectly yesterday, because they said, “He had
assets of $9 billion.” So I said (ph), “No, that’s the wrong number. That’s the
wrong number. Not assets.”

So they put together this. And before I say it, I have to say this. I made it
the old-fashioned way. It’s real estate. You know, it’s real estate.

It’s labor, and it’s unions good and some bad and lots of people that aren’t in
unions, and it’s all over the place and building all over the world.

And I have assets — big accounting firm, one of the most highly respected — 9
billion 240 million dollars.

And I have liabilities of about $500 million (ph). That’s long-term debt, very
low interest rates.

In fact, one of the big banks came to me and said, “Donald, you don’t have
enough borrowings. Could we loan you $4 billion”? I said, “I don’t need it. I
don’t want it. And I’ve been there. I don’t want it.”

But in two seconds, they give me whatever I wanted. So I have a total net
worth, and now with the increase, it’ll be well-over $10 billion. But here, a
total net worth of — net worth, not assets, not — a net worth, after all debt,
after all expenses, the greatest assets — Trump Tower, 1290 Avenue of the
Americas, Bank of America building in San Francisco, 40 Wall Street, sometimes
referred to as the Trump building right opposite the New York — many other
places all over the world.

So the total is $8,737,540,00.

Now I’m not doing that…

I’m not doing that to brag, because you know what? I don’t have to brag. I
don’t have to, believe it or not.

I’m doing that to say that that’s the kind of thinking our country needs. We
need that thinking. We have the opposite thinking.

We have losers. We have losers. We have people that don’t have it. We have
people that are morally corrupt. We have people that are selling this country
down the drain.

So I put together this statement, and the only reason I’m telling you about it
today is because we really do have to get going, because if we have another
three or four years — you know, we’re at $8 trillion now. We’re soon going to
be at $20 trillion.

According to the economists — who I’m not big believers in, but, nevertheless,
this is what they’re saying — that $24 trillion — we’re very close — that’s the
point of no return. $24 trillion. We will be there soon. That’s when we become
Greece. That’s when we become a country that’s unsalvageable. And we’re gonna
be there very soon. We’re gonna be there very soon.

So, just to sum up, I would do various things very quickly. I would repeal and
replace the big lie, Obamacare.

I would build a great wall, and nobody builds walls better than me, believe me,
and I’ll build them very inexpensively, I will build a great, great wall on our
southern border. And I will have Mexico pay for that wall.

Nobody would be tougher on ISIS than Donald Trump. Nobody.

I will find — within our military, I will find the General Patton or I will
find General MacArthur, I will find the right guy. I will find the guy that’s
going to take that military and make it really work. Nobody, nobody will be
pushing us around.

I will stop Iran from getting nuclear weapons. And we won’t be using a man like
Secretary Kerry that has absolutely no concept of negotiation, who’s making a
horrible and laughable deal, who’s just being tapped along as they make weapons
right now, and then goes into a bicycle race at 72 years old, and falls and
breaks his leg. I won’t be doing that. And I promise I will never be in a
bicycle race. That I can tell you.

I will immediately terminate President Obama’s illegal executive order on
immigration, immediately.

Fully support and back up the Second Amendment.

Now, it’s very interesting. Today I heard it. Through stupidity, in a very,
very hard core prison, interestingly named Clinton, two vicious murderers, two
vicious people escaped, and nobody knows where they are. And a woman was on
television this morning, and she said, “You know, Mr. Trump,” and she was
telling other people, and I actually called her, and she said, “You know, Mr.
Trump, I always was against guns. I didn’t want guns. And now since this
happened” — it’s up in the prison area — “my husband and I are finally in
agreement, because he wanted the guns. We now have a gun on every table. We’re
ready to start shooting.”

I said, “Very interesting.”

So protect the Second Amendment.

End — end Common Core. Common Core should — it is a disaster. Bush is totally
in favor of Common Core. I don’t see how he can possibly get the nomination.
He’s weak on immigration. He’s in favor of Common Core. How the hell can you
vote for this guy? You just can’t do it. We have to end — education has to be
local.

Rebuild the country’s infrastructure.

Nobody can do that like me. Believe me. It will be done on time, on budget, way
below cost, way below what anyone ever thought.

I look at the roads being built all over the country, and I say I can build
those things for one-third. What they do is unbelievable, how bad.

You know, we’re building on Pennsylvania Avenue, the Old Post Office, we’re
converting it into one of the world’s great hotels. It’s gonna be the best
hotel in Washington, D.C. We got it from the General Services Administration in
Washington. The Obama administration. We got it. It was the most highly sought
after — or one of them, but I think the most highly sought after project in the
history of General Services. We got it. People were shocked, Trump got it.

Well, I got it for two reasons. Number one, we’re really good. Number two, we
had a really good plan. And I’ll add in the third, we had a great financial
statement. Because the General Services, who are terrific people, by the way,
and talented people, they wanted to do a great job. And they wanted to make
sure it got built.

So we have to rebuild our infrastructure, our bridges, our roadways, our
airports. You come into La Guardia Airport, it’s like we’re in a third world
country. You look at the patches and the 40-year-old floor. They throw down
asphalt, and they throw.

You look at these airports, we are like a third world country. And I come in
from China and I come in from Qatar and I come in from different places, and
they have the most incredible airports in the world. You come to back to this
country and you have LAX, disaster. You have all of these disastrous airports.
We have to rebuild our infrastructure.

Save Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security without cuts. Have to do it.

Get rid of the fraud. Get rid of the waste and abuse, but save it. People have
been paying it for years. And now many of these candidates want to cut it. You
save it by making the United States, by making us rich again, by taking back
all of the money that’s being lost.

Renegotiate our foreign trade deals.

Reduce our $18 trillion in debt, because, believe me, we’re in a bubble. We
have artificially low interest rates. We have a stock market that, frankly, has
been good to me, but I still hate to see what’s happening. We have a stock
market that is so bloated.

Be careful of a bubble because what you’ve seen in the past might be small
potatoes compared to what happens. So be very, very careful.

And strengthen our military and take care of our vets. So, so important.

But if I get elected president I will bring it back bigger and better and
stronger than ever before, and we will make America great again.

This was going to be a speech on Hillary Clinton and all of the bad things and
we all know what’s going on, and especially how poor she’d do as president in
these very, very troubled times of radical Islamic terrorism.

Even her former Secret Service agent, who’s seen her under pressure and in
times of stress, has stated that she lacks the temperament and integrity to be
our president. There will be plenty of opportunity to discuss these important
issues at a later time, and I will deliver that speech very, very soon.

But today, there’s only one thing to discuss, the growing threat of terrorism
inside of our borders. The attack on the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, Florida,
was the worst terror strike on our soil since September 11th, and the worst
mass shooting in our country’s history.

So many people — it’s just hard to believe, but just so many people dead, so
many people gravely injured, so much carnage, such a disgrace. The horror is
beyond description. The families of these wonderful people are totally
devastated, and they will be forever. Likewise, our whole nation and indeed the
whole world is devastated.

We express our deepest sympathies to the victims, the wounded, and their
families. We mourn as one people for our nation’s loss, and pledge our support
to any and all who need it. I would like to ask now that we all observe a
moment of silence for the victims of this attack.

Thank you. Our nation stands together in solidarity with the members of
Orlando’s LGBT community. They have been through something that nobody could
ever experience. This is a very dark moment in America’s history. A radical
Islamic terrorist targeted the nightclub, not only because he wanted to kill
Americans, but in order to execute gay and lesbian citizens, because of their
sexual orientation.

It’s a strike at the heart and soul of who we are as a nation. It’s an assault
on the ability of free people to live their lives, love who they want, and
express their identity. It’s an attack on the right of every single American to
live in peace and safety in their own country.

We need to respond to this attack on America as one united people, with force,
purpose, and determination. But the current politically correct response
cripples our ability to talk and to think and act clearly. We’re not acting
clearly, we’re not talking clearly, we’ve got problems.

If we don’t get tough, and if we don’t get smart, and fast, we’re not going to
have our country anymore. There will be nothing, absolutely nothing, left. The
killer, whose name I will not use, or ever say, was born in Afghan, of Afghan
parents, who immigrated to the United States.

His father published support for the Afghan Taliban, a regime which murders
those who don’t share its radical views, and they murdered plenty. The father
even said he was running for president of Afghanistan. The bottom line is that
the only reason the killer was in America in the first place, was because we
allowed his family to come here.

That is a fact, and it’s a fact we need to talk about. We have a dysfunctional
immigration system, which does not permit us to know who we let into our
country, and it does not permit us to protect our citizens properly. We have an
incompetent administration.

And if I’m elected president, that will not change, I will tell you, that will
not change over the next four years. We have an administration that will not
change. But if I get in there, it’s going to change, and it’s going to change
quickly. We’re going from totally incompetent to just the opposite, believe me.

With 50 people dead and perhaps more ultimately and dozens more wounded, we
cannot afford to talk around issues anymore. We have to address these issues
head-on. I called for a ban after San Bernardino and was met with great scorn
and anger but now many years and I have to say many years but many are saying
that I was right to do so. And although the pause is temporary we must find out
what is going on. We have to do it.

It will be lifted — this ban — when and as a nation we’re in a position to
properly and perfectly screen these people coming into our country. They’re
pouring in and we don’t know what we’re doing. The immigration laws of the
United States give the president powers to suspend entry into the country of
any class of persons. Now, any class — it really is determined and to be
determined by the president for the interests of the United States. And it’s as
he or she deems appropriate. Hopefully it’s he in this case.

Thank you. I will use this power to protect the American people. When I’m
elected I will suspend immigration from areas of the world where there’s a
proven history of terrorism against the United States, Europe or our allies
until we fully understand how to end these threats.

And by the way we have no choice. After a full and partial and long — really
long overdue security assessment we will develop a responsible immigration
policy that serves the interests and values of America.

We cannot continue to allow thousands upon thousands of people to pour into our
country many of whom have the same thought process as this savage killer. Many
of the principles of radical Islam are incompatible with Western values and
institutions.

Remember this, radical Islam is anti-woman, anti-gay and anti- American.

I refuse to allow America to become a place where gay people, Christian people,
Jewish people are targets of persecution and intimation by radical Islamic
preachers of hate and violence.

This is not just a national security issue. It’s a quality of life issue. If we
want to protect the quality of life for all Americans — women and children, gay
and straight, Jews and Christians and all people then we need to tell the truth
about radical Islam and we need to do it now.

We need to tell the truth also about how radical Islam is coming to our shores.

With these people, folks, it’s coming. We’re importing radical Islamic
terrorism into the West through a failed immigration system and through an
intelligence community held back by our president. Even our own FBI director
has admitted that we cannot effectively check the backgrounds of people we’re
letting into America. All of the September 11th hijackists were issued visas.
Large numbers of Somali refugees in Minnesota have tried to join ISIS.

The Boston bombers came here through political asylum. The male shooter in San
Bernardino again whose name I will not mention was the child of immigrants from
Pakistan and he brought his wife, the other terrorist from Saudi Arabia through
another one of our easily exploited visa programs.

Immigration from Afghanistan into the United States has increased nearly five
fold — five fold in just one year. According to Pew Research, 99 percent of the
people in Afghanistan support oppressive sharia law. We admit many more, and
that’s just the way it is. We admit many more from other countries in the
region.

And I’ll tell you what: They share these oppressive views and values. We want
to remain a free and open society. Then, and if we do, then we have to control
our borders. We have to control, and we have to control them now, not later.
Right now.

Yet Hillary Clinton, for months, and despite so many attacks, repeatedly
refused to even say the words radical Islam until I challenged her yesterday.
And, guess what, she will probably say them. She sort of has said them, but
let’s see what happens. She really has no choice, but she doesn’t want to.

However, she’s really been forced, and she has been forced to say these words.
She supports, and the reason is, she supports so much of what is wrong, and
what is wrong with this country, and what’s going wrong with our country and
our borders. She has no clue, in my opinion, what radical Islam is and she
won’t speak honestly about it if she does, in fact, know. She’s in total
denial, and her continuing reluctance to ever name the enemy broadcasts
weakness across the entire world — true weakness.

I don’t know if you know this, but just a few weeks before San Bernardino, the
slaughter, that’s all it was was a slaughter, Hillary Clinton explained her
refusal to say the words “radical Islam.” Here is what she said, exact quote,
“Muslims are peaceful and tolerant people, and have nothing whatsoever to do
with terrorism.” That is Hillary Clinton.

So, she says the solution is to ban guns. They tried that in France which has
among the toughest gun laws anywhere in the world, and 130 people were brutally
murdered by Islamic terrorists in cold blood. Her plan is to disarm law abiding
Americans, abolishing the Second Amendment, and leaving only the bad guys and
terrorists with guns. No good. Not going to happen, folks. Not going to happen.
Not going to happen.

She wants to take away American’s guns and then admit the very people who want
to slaughter us. Let them come into the country, we don’t have guns. Let them
come in, let them have all the fun they want.

I will be meeting with the NRA, which has given me their earliest endorsement
in a presidential race, to discuss how to ensure Americans have the means to
protect themselves in this age of terror. I will be always defending the Second
Amendment.

The bottom line is that Hillary supports policies that bring the threat of
radical Islam into American and allow it to grow oversees, and it is growing.
In fact, Hillary Clinton’s catastrophic immigration plan will bring vastly more
radical Islamic immigration into this country, threatening not only our society
but our entire way of life. When it comes to radical Islamic terrorism,
ignorance is not bliss. It’s deadly — totally deadly.

The Obama administration, with the support of Hillary Clinton and others, has
also damaged our security by restraining our intelligence gathering and we
have, just, no intelligence gathering information. We need this information so
badly, and he stopped it. We don’t have the support. We don’t have the support
of the law enforcement system because Obama is not letting them do their job.
They are not being allowed to do their job. And, they can do it well — better
than anybody.

We need a new leader. We need a new leader fast.

They have put political correctness above common sense, above your safety, and
above all else. I refuse to be politically correct.

I want to do the right thing. I want to straighten things out and I want to
make America great again.

The days of deadly ignorance will end, and they will end soon if I’m elected.
As president I will give our intelligence community, law enforcement and
military the tools they need to prevent terrorist attacks. They don’t have
those tools now.

We need an intelligence gathering system second to none. Second to none. That
includes better cooperation between state, local and federal officials, and
with our allies, very importantly. I will have an Attorney General, a Director
of National Intelligence and a Secretary of Defense who’ll know how to fight a
war on radical Islamic terrorism.

And they will have the support that they need to get the job done right, not
like it is right now. It’s not right.

We also must ensure the American people are provided the information they need
to understand the threat. The Senate subcommittee on Immigration has already
identified hundreds of immigrants charged with terrorist activities inside the
United States since September 11th. Nearly a year ago, the Senate Subcommittee
asked President Obama’s Department of Justice, State and Homeland Security to
provide the immigration history of all terrorists inside the United States.
These Departments refused to comply. Nobody even knows why. They refused to
comply.

President Obama must release the full and complete immigration histories of all
individuals implicated in terrorist activities of any kind since September
11th. So important. The public has a right to know how these people got here,
how they came on to this great land, why are they here?

We have to screen applicants to know whether they are affiliated with or
supporting radical groups and beliefs, very simple. We have to control the
amount of future immigration into this country and we have to prevent large
pockets of radicalization from forming inside America. Not complicated.

Every – and just think of this. Take a look. Every single event, even a single
individual can be devastating, and all you have to do is take a look at what
happened in Orlando and what happened in other cases. Just a single event. And
just one person. Can you imagine what they’ll do in large groups, which we’re
allowing now to come here.

Truly our President doesn’t know what he’s doing. He’s failed us and he’s
failed us badly. Under his leadership this situation will not get any better,
it will only get worse. And I’ve been saying that for a long time. Each year
the United States permanently admits 100,000 immigrants from the Middle East
and many more from Muslim countries outside of the Middle East. Our government
has been admitting ever- growing numbers, year after year, without any
effective plan for our own security.

In fact, Clinton’s State Department was in charge of admissions and the
admissions process for people applying to enter from overseas. Having learned
nothing from these attacks, she now plans to massively increase admissions
without a screening plan including a 500 percent increase in Syrian refugees
coming into our country. Tell me, tell me – how stupid is that?

This could be a better, bigger, more horrible version than the legendary Trojan
Horse ever was. Altogether, under the Clinton plan, you’d be admitting hundreds
of thousands of refugees from the Middle East with no system to vet them, or to
prevent the radicalization of the children and their children. Not only their
children, by the way, they’re trying to take over our children and convince
them how wonderful ISIS is and how wonderful Islam is and we don’t know what’s
happening.

The burden is on Hillary Clinton to tell us why she believes immigration from
these dangerous countries should be increased without any effective system to
really to screen. We’re not screening people.

So why don’t we have an effective screening system? We don’t. We’re being
laughed at all over the world. The burden is on Hillary Clinton to tell us why
we should admit anyone into our country who supports violence of any kind
against gay and lesbian Americans. The burden is on Hillary Clinton to tell us
how she will pay for it, her plan will cost hundreds of billions of dollars
long term.

Wouldn’t this be money better spent rebuilding America for our current
population including the many poor people already living here.

We have poverty all over and this is how we’re spending billions of dollars. We
have to stop the tremendous flow of Syrian refugees into the United States. We
don’t know who they are, they have no documentation and we don’t know what
they’re planning and we won’t unless we have proper supervisor and proper
leadership in which case they’re out of here.

What I want is common sense. I want a mainstream immigration policy that
promotes American values. That’s a choice I put before the American people. A
mainstream immigration policy designed to benefit America or Hillary Clinton’s
radical immigration policy designed to benefit politically correct special
interests. That’s all it is. We’ve got to get smart and tough and vigilant and
we’ve got to do it now because later is too late — going to be too late for our
country.

The media talks about home grown terrorism but Islamic radicalism and that’s a
very, very important term — a term that the president refuses to use and the
networks that nurture it are imports from overseas whether you like it or
whether you don’t like it. Yes, there are many radicalized people already
inside our country as a result of poor policies of the past.

But the whole point is that we will be much, much and it will be easier to deal
with our current problem if we don’t keep on bringing people who add to the
problem. And that’s what they’re doing. We’re letting all of these people —
hundreds of thousands of people come in and all they’re doing is adding to this
incredible problem we have.

For instance, the controversial mosque attended by the Boston bombers had at
its founder and as its founder an immigrant from overseas charged in an
assassination plot. This shooter and amazingly in Orlando was the child of an
immigrant father who supported one of the most repressive regimes on earth. Why
would we admit people who support violent hatred?

Hillary Clinton can never claim to be a friend of the gay community as long as
she continues to support immigration policies that bring Islamic extremists to
our country and who suppress women, gays and anyone who doesn’t share their
views or values.

She can’t have it both ways. She can’t claim to be supportive of these
communities while trying to increase the number of people coming in who want to
oppress these same communities. How does this kind of immigration make our
lives better? How does this kind of immigration make our country better? Why
does Hillary Clinton want to bring people in in vast numbers who reject our
values? Why? Explain.

Ask yourself who is really the friend of women and the LGBT community, Donald
Trump with actions or Hillary Clinton with her words?

I will tell you who the better friend is and some day I believe that will be
proven out bigly

And by the way the LGBT community is just — what’s happened to them is just so
sad and to be thinking about where their policies are currently with this
administration is a disgrace to that community, I will tell you right now.

Clinton wants to allow radical Islamic terrorists to pour into our country.
They enslave women, and they murder gays. I don’t want them in our country.

Immigration is a privilege, and we should not let anyone into this country who
doesn’t support our communities. All of our communities, every single one of
them. Americans already admitted four times more immigrants than any country on
Earth, anybody in the world. Four times more. At least, because we don’t even
know who’s coming in. And we continue to admit millions more with no real
checks or scrutiny.

Not surprisingly, wages for our workers haven’t budged. In almost 20 years. You
wonder why we get the crowds, you wonder why we get this tremendous support,
you wonder why I’ve gotten more votes than any Republican in any primary in the
history of the Republican Party? Take a look at that. Take a look at your
security, take a look at the wages. For 18 years they’ve been stagnant, they’ve
even gone down.

So whether it’s a matter of national security, or financial security, we can’t
afford to keep on going like this. Cannot afford it. We owe $19 trillion in
debt. And no longer have any options. Our communities from all backgrounds are
ready for some relief. This is not an act of offense against anyone. It’s
really an act of defense. I want us all, all of us, to work together. We have
to form a partnership, with our Muslim communities. We have Muslim communities
in this country that are great, and we have to form that partnership.

Now, the Muslim community, so important. They have to work with us. They have
to cooperate with law enforcement and turn in the people who they know are bad.
They know it. And they have to do it, and they have to do it forthwith. I want
to fix our schools. I want to fix our bridges. And our jobs market, we’re going
to have it rocket again, we’re going to make great trade deals. But I want
every American to succeed including Muslims.

But the Muslims have to work with us. They have to work with us. They know
what’s going on. They know that he was bad. They knew the people in San
Bernardino were bad. But you know what? They didn’t turn them in. And you know
what? We had death, and destruction.

Hillary Clinton wants to empty out the Treasury to bring people into the
country that include individuals who preach hate against our citizens. I want
to protect our citizens, all of our citizens. The terrorist attack on Pulse
nightclub demands a full and complete investigation into every single aspect of
the assault. In San Bernardino, as an example, people who knew what was going
on, they knew exactly, but they used the excuse of racial profiling for not
reporting it. They said oh, “We thought so but we didn’t want to use racial
profiling.” Which was probably an excuse given to them by their lawyer, so they
don’t get in trouble.

We need to know what the killer discussed with his relatives, parents, friends
and associates. We need to know if he was affiliated with any radical mosques
or radical activists and what, if any, is their immigration status. We have to
know, and we have to know fast. We need to know if he traveled anywhere and who
he traveled with. We need to know, and we need to make sure, every single last
person involved in this plan, including anyone who knew something but didn’t
tell us, is brought to justice, so when people know what’s going on and they
don’t tell us, and we have an attack, and people die, these people have to have
consequences. Big consequences.

America must do more — much more — to protect its citizens, especially people
who are potential victims of crimes based on their backgrounds or sexual
orientation, as you just saw in Orlando.

 It also means we must change our foreign policy. The decision to
overthrow the regime in Libya, then pushing for the overthrow of the regime in
Syria, among other things, without plans for the day after, have created space
for ISIS to expand and grow like nobody has ever seen before.

These actions, along with our disastrous Iran deal, have also reduced our
ability to work in partnership with our Muslim allies in the region. That is
why our new goal must be to defeat Islamic terrorism not nation building. No
more nation building. It’s never going to work.

And by the way we’ve spent almost $5 trillion over the years on trying to
nation build in the Middle East and it has been complete and total disaster.
We’re further away now than we were 15 years ago. For instance, the last major
NATO mission was Hillary Clinton’s war in Libya. That mission helped to unleash
ISIS on a new continent.

I’ve said NATO need to change its focus and stop terrorism. We have to focus on
terrorism and we have to stop terrorism. Since I’ve raised that criticism and
it’s OK. I’ve gotten no credit for it but these are minor details — NATO has
since announced a new initiative — front page of the Wall Street Journal four
days ago focused on just that. America must unite the whole civilized world in
the fight against Islamic terrorism.

Pretty much like we did with communism during the Cold War. We tried it
President Obama’s way, doesn’t work. He gave the world his apology tour. We got
ISIS and many other problems in return. That’s what we got. Remember the famous
apology tour. We’re sorry for everything.

I’d like to conclude my remarks today by again expressing our solitarily with
the people of Orlando who have come under this horrific attack. When I’m
president I pledge to protect and defend all Americans who live inside our
borders. Wherever they come from, wherever they were born, I don’t care. All
Americans living here and following our laws not other laws will be protected.

Thank you. Thank you. We’re going to be tough and we’re going to be smart and
we’re going to do it right. America will be a tolerant and open society.
America will also be a safe society. We will protect our borders at home. We
will defeat ISIS overseas. We have no choice. We will ensure every parent can
raise their children in peace and safety. We will make America rich again. We
will make America safe again. We will make America great again

Over the next 80 days, we are going to work very hard together, and we are going to win this state – and we are going to win the White House.

It is going to be a new day in America.

Government will listen to the people again.

The voters, not the special interests, will be in charge.

Our economy will grow.

Jobs will come pouring in.

New factories are going to stretch across this nation.

Families are going to be safe and secure. Crime will go down, and law and order will be restored.

Immigration laws will be enforced, and trade deals will protect American workers.

We are going to reject globalism and put America First. It’s going to be America First from now on.

This is the change I am promising. My opponent is the corrupt defender of a rigged system and a failed status quo.

She is an insider fighting for insiders.

I am an outsider fighting for you.

Hillary Clinton is a throwback from Yesterday.

Our campaign is about creating a New American Future.

I am not a politician. I have no special interest. My only interest is you, the American people.

I am running to represent the great majority of Americans – Republicans, Democrats, Independents, Liberals and Conservatives – who turn on the TV every night and don’t see anyone speaking up for them.

This campaign is about giving a voice to those who don’t have one.

I understand the great responsibility you have placed with me, and I will never let you down.

Once more, it will be a government of, by and for the people.

Let’s talk about what my reform agenda will mean for the citizens of Virginia.

First, let’s talk about our amazing Veterans.

The Commonwealth of Virginia is home to about 800,000 Veterans who have served this country.

To all Veterans here tonight, and across this nation I say: Thank You. We will never let you down.

The Obama-Clinton Administration has betrayed our Veterans, and it’s betrayed them badly.

Veterans are dying waiting for the care they need.

That ends – and it ends fast – under a Trump Administration.

I have a detailed ten-point plan on Veterans reform, available on my website.

At the center of the plan is Veterans’ choice. The VA will remain a public system because it is a public trust. But Veterans will have the right to either seek care at a VA facility, or to go to a private doctor or medical clinic. Never again will we allow a Veteran to die waiting for the care they need.

A Trump Administration will also rebuild our depleted military.

The best way to keep our troops out of harm’s way, and to keep our nation out of preventable conflicts, is to remember those famous words: Peace Through Strength.

Unfortunately, our active duty armed forces have shrunk from 2 million in 1991 to about 1.3 million today.

The Navy has shrunk from over 500 ships to 272 ships during this same period of time.

The Air Force is about one-third smaller than 1991.

President Obama has proposed a 2017 defense budget that in real dollars, cuts nearly 25 percent from what we were spending in 2011.

We face threats as never before, but the Obama-Clinton Administration is determined to keep shrinking our military. That’s probably because President Obama has said he thinks the greatest threat we face is Global Warming.

Remember, President Obama and Hillary Clinton can’t even say the words: Radical Islamic Terrorism.

Now, while President Obama and Hillary Clinton are shrinking America’s military, they are expanding the military of Iran. They are doing this with their disastrous deal that puts Iran on the path to nuclear weapons, and gives them another $150 billion dollars – not to mention the $400 million dollars in cash ransom payments.

Let’s also not forget that Hillary Clinton’s disastrous Middle East policies unleashed ISIS onto the world – a fact for which Hillary Clinton has expressed zero remorse. She will never be able to fix the ISIS problem that her policies created.

Yet, as our military was depleted on Hillary Clinton’s watch, things turned out really well for her. The Clintons made $60 million dollars in gross income while she was Secretary of State, plus countless more to the Clinton Foundation.

It’s called pay-for-play.

She even created an illegal private email server – one easily hacked by our foreign enemies – to hide her corrupt dealings. Then, she deleted 33,000 emails to try and cover her tracks. She lied about it all, even to Congress.

A Trump Administration will end the government corruption. No one will be above the law.

Let’s talk about another major issue here in Virginia: Energy.

I visited the hardworking miners in this state. They are tremendous people who only want to be able to do their jobs, provide for their families and power this country.

We are going to put our great miners and steel workers back to work.

But Hillary Clinton wants to put them out of a job.

Let’s repeat her infamous words. Clinton vowed that she would “put a lot of coal miners and coal companies out of business.”

According to the Energy Information Administration, the U.S. has the largest recoverable coal reserves in the world. These reserves are located in Virginia, West Virginia, Kentucky, Pennsylvania, and Illinois – to name a few examples.

Over 90 percent of U.S. coal is used for electricity.

In other words, my plan will make your energy bill cheaper.

Hillary Clinton’s anti-energy agenda is a massive tax on the poor.

In January of 2016, the Obama Administration announced a moratorium on new coal leases on federal lands. This comes on the heels of many other anti-coal regulations from the Obama Administration. Virginia, the largest exporter of coal in the United States, will be crushed by these Obama-Clinton policies.

Absolutely crushed.

Thanks to the Obama-Clinton agenda, coal exports from the Port of Virginia – the largest port for coal exportation in the U.S. – have declined significantly the last 3 years. Virginia has seen a stunning 70 percent decline in coal jobs since 1990.

Hillary Clinton will finish the mining industry off for good.

We won’t let that happen.

According to the Heritage Foundation, by 2030, the Obama-Clinton energy restrictions will eliminate another half a million manufacturing jobs, reduce economic output by $2.5 trillion dollars, and reduce incomes by $7,000 dollars per person.

A Trump Administration will end the Obama-Clinton war on the American worker.

We will unleash an energy revolution the likes of which we have never seen before.

According to the Institute for Energy Research, lifting the restrictions on all sources of American energy will:

--Increase GDP by more than $100 billion dollars annually

--Add over 500,000 new jobs annually

--Increase annual wages by more than $30 billion dollars over the next 7 years

--Increase federal, state, and local tax revenues by almost $6 trillion dollars over 4 decades

--Increase total economic activity by more than $20 trillion dollars over the next 40 years.

Doesn’t that sound good to you?

Hillary Clinton will Make America Poor. I want to Make America Wealthy Again.

Another industry of huge importance to this state, and country, is agriculture.

Farmers are the backbone of America. Agriculture and forestry, combined, provide over 400,000 jobs right here in the Commonwealth.

But the massive regulations and EPA interventions from the Obama-Clinton Administration have devastated America’s farmers, agriculture and forestry workers.

Hillary Clinton supports every last job-killing Obama regulation, and wants to go even further. She wants to put the farmers out of business, just like she wants to put the miners and steel workers out of business.

In fact, Hillary Clinton’s $1.3 trillion dollar tax hike would raise taxes on family farms to as much as nearly fifty percent. She even wants to tax them again at death by as much as 45 percent. It’s a war on farmers.

A Trump Administration will be a pro-agriculture Administration.

I just announced the new members of my Agricultural Advisory Committee, and they include Virginia’s own Congressman Bob Goodlatte.

Together, we are going to work on reforms to support our family farms and boost agricultural production in America.

That begins with hiring a pro-farmer pro-American energy head of the EPA.

It also means I am going to eliminate the destructive and invasive Waters of the United States rule that was unilaterally issued by this Administration. This rule is so extreme it gives federal agencies control over creeks and small streams – even puddles – on private property.

I am also going to cut taxes for family farms – down to fifteen percent. On top of that, we are going to end the death tax on family farms, which has severely injured this family industry and the American tradition of family farming.

Then, by unleashing American energy – including coal – we are going to make it easier, cheaper and less expensive to produce, saving money for consumers as well. This will give America the competitive edge it needs.

Finally, on this subject, when we negotiate trade deals, we will make sure they are fair and balanced – no more one-sided trade deals where we open our markets but they close theirs. Not anymore.

Another issue I’d like to address briefly today is very important to everyone in this state and country: law and order.

I was honored to meet today with Stafford County Sheriff’s Deputy Brandon Boyle, who sustained five gunshot wounds this summer in the line of duty.

I want to take a moment today to thank all the men and women who serve this country as law enforcement officers. We thank you, and we stand with you.

I am proud to have the support of the Law Enforcement Community. By contrast, Hillary Clinton is banking on her friend Terry McAuliffe getting thousands of violent felons to the voting booths, in an effort to cancel out the votes of both the law enforcement community and crime victims.

At the same time, Hillary Clinton wants to essentially abolish the 2nd amendment for law-abiding Americans. She wants to overturn the Supreme Court ruling that affirmed the 2nd Amendment as a private right, so that any city or state in this country can ban private gun ownership.

We will save the 2nd amendment, and appoint judges who will protect your freedoms.

One more issue central to law and order is having a secure immigration system.

Failed Governor Tim Kaine – on whose watch Virginia’s unemployment rate more than doubled – allowed illegal immigration in Virginia to massively increase. By the way, less than a week into entering office, Tim Kaine proposed nearly $4 billion dollars in new taxes – including a tax increase on people earning as little as $17,000 a year.

Overall, the illegal immigrant population in Virginia has nearly tripled since 2000, putting enormous pressure on schools and public services. It’s getting worse now as thousands of recent border-crossers are being relocated to the state.

The people hurt most by our open border are low-income Hispanic and African-Americans who are competing for jobs and community resources against new lower-wage arrivals.

Our open border is also being used as a recruiting tool for criminal gangs, creating a growing gang problem right here in the state of Virginia where a large number of gang members are in the country illegally.

We are going to end this chaos and restore peace, law and order to our land.

Finally, today, I’d like to address an issue of great and deep personal importance to me.

In recent days, across this country, I’ve asked the African-American community to honor me with their vote. I fully recognize that outreach to the African-American community is an area where the Republican Party must do better.

The GOP is the Party of Lincoln, and I want our party to be the home of the African-American vote once again. I want an inclusive country, and I want an inclusive party.

We reject the bigotry of Hillary Clinton who sees people of color only as votes, not as human beings worthy of a better future.

We’ve seen what the Democratic policies have done in cities like Detroit, Baltimore and Chicago.

Now, Hillary Clinton wants to make things worse by raising taxes on 2.6 million African-American owned businesses in this country.

My goal is to provide every African-American child in this country with access to the ladder of American success: a good education, and a good-paying job.

This includes school choice. It means reforming regulations so young Americans can get the credit they need to start a small business. It means trade and immigration policies that put American workers at the front of the line.

Hillary Clinton’s amnesty plan will give jobs, benefits and Social Security to millions of people here illegally at taxpayer expense.

On top of that, according to the U.S. Senate Immigration Subcommittee, her plan would bring 620,000 refugees in her first term alone.

She would rather provide a job to a refugee living overseas than a young unemployed African-American youth in Virginia.

A Trump Administration will put American workers first.

Americanism, not globalism, will be our credo.

We will bring America together as one country again – united as Americans in common purpose and common dreams.

A thriving economy.

A strong border.

A powerful military.

A peaceful nation.

A rising standard of living.

This is what I promise you.

Let’s get out there and win on November 8th.

Together, We Will Make America Wealthy Again

We Will Make America Proud Again.

We Will Make America Safe Again.

And We Will Make America Great Again For Each And Every American.

Thank you, and God Bless You!

It’s so great to be here tonight. I am honored to also be joined this evening by Governor Scott Walker, Chairman Reince Priebus, and Mayor Rudy Giuliani.

We are at a decisive moment in this election.

Last week, I laid out my plan to bring jobs back to our country. Yesterday, I laid out my plan to defeat Radical Islamic Terrorism. Tonight, I am going to talk about how to make our communities safe again from crime and lawlessness.

Let me begin by thanking the law enforcement officers here in this city, and across this country, for their service and sacrifice in difficult times.

The violence, riots and destruction that have taken place in Milwaukee is an assault on the right of all citizens to live in security and peace.

Law and order must be restored. It must be restored for the sake of all, but most especially the sake of those living in the affected communities.

The main victims of these riots are law-abiding African-American citizens living in these neighborhoods. It is their jobs, their homes, their schools and communities which will suffer as a result.

There is no compassion in tolerating lawless conduct. Crime and violence is an attack on the poor, and will never be accepted in a Trump Administration.

The narrative that has been pushed aggressively for years now by our current Administration, and pushed by my opponent Hillary Clinton, is a false one. The problem in our poorest communities is not that there are too many police, the problem is that there are not enough police.

More law enforcement, more community engagement, more effective policing is what our country needs.

Just like Hillary Clinton is against the miners, she is against the police. You know it, and I know it.

Those peddling the narrative of cops as a racist force in our society – a narrative supported with a nod by my opponent – share directly in the responsibility for the unrest in Milwaukee, and many other places within our country.

They have fostered the dangerous anti-police atmosphere in America.

Everytime we rush to judgment with false facts and narratives – whether in Ferguson or in Baltimore – and foment further unrest, we do a direct disservice to poor African-American residents who are hurt by the high crime in their communities.

During the last 72 hours, while protestors have raged against the police here in Milwaukee, another 9 were killed in Chicago and another 46 were wounded. More than 2,600 people have been shot in Chicago since the beginning of the year, and almost 4,000 killed in President Obama’s hometown area since his presidency began.

How are we serving these American victims by attacking law enforcement officers?

The war on our police must end. It must end now.

The war on our police is a war on all peaceful citizens who want to be able to work and live and send their kids to school in safety.

Our job is not to make life more comfortable for the rioter, the looter, the violent disruptor. Our job is to make life more comfortable for the African-American parent who wants their kids to be able to safely walk the streets. Or the senior citizen waiting for a bus. Or the young child walking home from school.

For every one violent protestor, there are a hundred moms and dads and kids on that same city block who just want to be able to sleep safely at night. My opponent would rather protect the offender than the victim.

Hillary Clinton-backed policies are responsible for the problems in the inner cities today, and a vote for her is a vote for another generation of poverty, high crime, and lost opportunities.

I care too much about my country to let that happen.

We all care too much about our country to let that happen.

Good policing saves lives. My dear friend, Rudy Giuliani, knows a thing or two about this. The policies put into place by Rudy ultimately brought down crime by 76 percent and murder by 84 percent. Think of how many families were saved, how much heartache was prevented, when police were put into communities and criminals were removed.

Imagine how many lives could have been saved, all across this country, if Democratic politicians hadn’t blocked in their cities what Rudy did in New York City? I’ll make sure we deliver safe neighborhoods here in Milwaukee, and all across this country.

It’s easy for Hillary Clinton to turn a blind eye to crime when she has her own private security force. I believe all Americans, not just the powerful, are entitled to security.

Hillary Clinton has had her chance. She failed. Now it’s time for new leadership.

The Hillary Clinton agenda hurts poor people the most.

There is no compassion in allowing drug dealers, gang members, and felons to prey on innocent people. It is the first duty of government to keep the innocent safe, and when I am President I will fight for the safety of every American – and especially those Americans who have not known safety for a very, very long time.

I am asking for the vote of every African-American citizen struggling in our country today who wants a different future.

It is time for our society to address some honest and very difficult truths.

The Democratic Party has failed and betrayed the African-American community. Democratic crime policies, education policies, and economic policies have produced only more crime, more broken homes, and more poverty.

Let us look at the situation right here in Milwaukee, a city run by Democrats for decade after decade. Last year, killings in this city increased by 69 percent, plus another 634 victims of non-fatal shootings. 18-29-year-olds accounted for nearly half of the homicide victims. The poverty rate here is nearly double the national average. Almost 4 in 10 African-American men in Milwaukee between the ages of 25-54 do not have a job. Nearly four in 10 single mother households are living in poverty. 55 public schools in this city have been rated as failing to meet expectations, despite ten thousand dollars in funding per-pupil. There is only a 60% graduation rate, and it’s one of the worst public school systems in the country.

1 in 5 manufacturing jobs has disappeared in Milwaukee since we fully opened our markets to China, and many African-American neighborhoods have borne the brunt of this hit.

To every voter in Milwaukee, to every voter living in every inner city, or every forgotten stretch of our society, I am running to offer you a better future.

The Democratic Party has taken the votes of African-Americans for granted. They’ve just assumed they’ll get your support and done nothing in return for it. It’s time to give the Democrats some competition for these votes, and it’s time to rebuild the inner cities of America – and to reject the failed leadership of a rigged political system.

I’m not part of the corrupt system. In fact, the corrupt system is trying to stop me. I’ve been paying my own way. The voters in the Republican Party this year defied the donors, the consultants, the power brokers, and choose a nominee from outside our failed and corrupt and broken system.

The other party – the Democratic Party – nominated the personification of special interest corruption. The Democratic Party rigged the nomination to give it to Hillary Clinton, thus giving the soul of their party this year to the special interests.

I am running to listen to your voice, to hear your cries for help. The quiet voices in our society, not the loudest demonstrators, need to have their demands heard.

Jobs. Safety. Opportunity. Fair and equal representation.

We reject the bigotry of Hillary Clinton which panders to and talks down to communities of color and sees them only as votes, not as individual human beings worthy of a better future. She doesn’t care at all about the hurting people of this country, or the suffering she has caused them.

The African-American community has been taken for granted for decades by the Democratic Party. It’s time to break with the failures of the past – I want to offer Americans a new future.

It is time for rule by the people, not rule by special interests.

Every insider, getting rich off of our broken system, is throwing money at Hillary Clinton. The hedge fund managers, the Wall Street investors, the professional political class.

It’s the powerful protecting the powerful.

Insiders fighting for insiders.

I am fighting for you.

When we talk about the insider, who are we talking about? It’s the comfortable politicians looking out for their own interests. It’s the lobbyists who know how to insert that perfect loophole into every bill. It’s the financial industry that knows how to regulate their competition out of existence. The insiders also include the media executives, anchors and journalists in Washington, Los Angeles, and New York City, who are part of the same failed status quo and want nothing to change.

Every day you pick up a newspaper, or turn on the nightly news, and you hear about some self-interest banker or some discredited Washington insider says they oppose our campaign. Or some encrusted old politician says they oppose our campaign. Or some big time lobbyist says they oppose our campaign.

I wear their opposition as a badge of honor. Because it means I am fighting for REAL change, not just partisan change. I am fighting – all of us across the country are fighting – for peaceful regime change in our own country. The media-donor-political complex that’s bled this country dry has to be replaced with a new government of, by and for the people.

The leadership class in Washington D.C., of which Hillary Clinton has been a member for thirty years, has abandoned the people of this country.

I am going to give the people their voice back.

Think about it. The people opposing our campaign are the same people who have left our border open and let innocent people suffer as a result.

The people opposing our campaign are the same people who have led us into one disastrous foreign war after another.

The people opposing our campaign are the same people who lied to us about one trade deal after another.

Aren’t you tired of a system that gets rich at your expense?

Aren’t you tired of big media, big businesses, and big donors rigging the system to keep your voice from being heard?

Are you ready for change?

Are you ready for leadership that puts you, the American people, first? That puts your country first? That puts your family first?

Let’s talk about what this means for the inner cities of America. It’s time to break through the television noise, the entrenched interests. I understand that a lot of powerful people in our political system – a lot of people who’ve created our problems – will lose a lot of their contracts, and their special gigs, if African-American voters, and all minority voters, support my campaign.

It’s time to stop making the special interests rich. It’s time to make the American people rich.

I am going to Make America Wealthy Again.

The Democratic Party has run nearly every inner city in this country for 50 years, and run them into financial ruin.

They’ve ruined the schools.

They’ve driven out the jobs.

They’ve tolerated a level of crime no American should consider acceptable.

Violent crime has risen 17% in America’s 50 largest cities last year. Killings of police officers this year is up nearly 50 percent. Homicides are up more than 60% in Baltimore. They are up more than 50% in Washington, D.C.

This is the future offered by Hillary Clinton. More poverty, more crime, and more of the same. The future she offers is the most pessimistic thing I can possibly imagine.

It is time for a different future.

Here is what I am proposing.

First, on immigration. No community in this country has been hurt worse by Hillary Clinton’s immigration policies than the African-American community. Now she is proposing to print instant work permits for millions of illegal immigrants, taking jobs directly from low-income Americans. I will secure our border, protect our workers, and improve jobs and wages in your community. We will only invite people to join our country who share our tolerant values, who support our Constitution, and who love all of our people.

On trade, I am going to renegotiate NAFTA, stand up to China, withdraw from the TPP, and protect every last American job.

On taxes, I am going to give a massive tax cut to every worker and small business in this country, bring thousands of new companies and millions of new jobs onto our shores – and make it very difficult for our businesses to leave.

I am going to reform our regulations so jobs stay in America, and new businesses come to America to hire workers right here in Milwaukee. Every policy my opponent has sends jobs overseas. I am going to bring trillions in new wealth back to the United States.

On education, it is time to have school choice, merit pay for teachers, and to end the tenure policies that hurt good teachers and reward bad teachers. We are going to put students and parents first.

Hillary Clinton would rather deny opportunities to millions of young African-American children, just so she can curry favor with the education bureaucracy.

I am going to allow charter schools to thrive, and help young kids get on the American ladder of success: a good education, and a good-paying job.

On crime, I am going to support more police in our communities, appoint the best prosecutors and judges in the country, pursue strong enforcement of federal laws, and I am going to break up the gangs, the cartels and criminal syndicates terrorizing our neighborhoods. To every lawbreaker hurting innocent people in this country, I say: your free reign will soon come crashing to an end.

On healthcare, we are going to get rid of Obamacare – which has caused soaring double-digit premium increases – and give choice to patients and consumers. Aetna, just today, announced they are dropping out – as are many of the major insurance companies.

On government corruption, I am going to restore honor to our government. We’ve seen the corruption of Hillary Clinton, the mass email deletions, the pay-for-play at the State Department, the profiteering, the favors given to foreign corporations and governments at your expense. We’ve seen a former Secretary of State lie to Congress about her illegal email scheme, risk innocent American lives, and bring dishonor onto our government.

In my Administration, I am going to enforce all laws concerning the protection of classified information. No one will be above the law.

I am going to forbid senior officials from trading favors for cash by preventing them from collecting lavish speaking fees through their spouses when they serve.

I am going to ask my senior officials to sign an agreement not to accept speaking fees from corporations with a registered lobbyist for five years after leaving office, or from any entity tied to a foreign government. This is all just the beginning.

We are going to make this a government of the people once again. This is our chance to take back power from all the people who’ve taken it from you. The reason you see the establishment media lining up behind my opponent is because they are scared that you, with your vote, can take away their power and return it to your family and community.

These are tough times. But I know we can make American Greater Than Ever Before.

To do this, we are going to need a fighter in the White House.

I will be your fighter.

To defeat crime and Radical Islamic Terrorism in our country, to win trade in our country, you need tremendous physical and mental strength and stamina. Hillary Clinton doesn’t have that strength and stamina. She cannot win for you.

Most importantly, she has bad judgment. Bad judgment on terrorism, bad judgement on foreign policy, bad judgment on trade.

The only individuals she’s ever delivered for is her donors – not the people.

I’ve said it before, and I’ll say it again. My opponent asks her supporters to repeat a three-word pledge. Her pledge reads: “I’m With Her”

I choose to recite a different pledge. My pledge reads: “I’m With You – the American people.”

I will fight to ensure that every American is treated equally, protected equally, and honored equally. We will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its forms, and seek a new future of security, prosperity and opportunity – a future built on our common culture and values as one American people.

I am asking for your vote so I can be your champion in the White House. We will once again be a country of law and order, and a country of great success.

To every parent who dreams for their children, and to every child who dreams for their future, I say these words to you tonight: I’m with you, I will fight for you, and I will win for you.

Together, We Will Make America Strong Again.

We Will Make American Safe Again.

And We Will Make America Great Again.

Thank you, and God Bless.