Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you, and thank you to the Center for
National Interest for honoring me with this invitation. It truly is a great
honor. I’d like to talk today about how to develop a new foreign policy
direction for our country, one that replaces randomness with purpose, ideology
with strategy, and chaos with peace.

It’s time to shake the rust off America’s foreign policy. It’s time to invite
new voices and new visions into the fold, something we have to do. The
direction I will outline today will also return us to a timeless principle. My
foreign policy will always put the interests of the American people and
American security above all else. It has to be first. Has to be.

That will be the foundation of every single decision that I will make.

America First will be the major and overriding theme of my administration. But
to chart our path forward, we must first briefly take a look back. We have a
lot to be proud of.
Continue reading the main story

In the 1940s we saved the world. The greatest generation beat back the Nazis
and Japanese imperialists. Then we saved the world again. This time, from
totalitarianism and communism. The Cold War lasted for decades but, guess what,
we won and we won big. Democrats and Republicans working together got Mr.
Gorbachev to heed the words of President Reagan, our great president, when he
said, tear down this wall.

History will not forget what he did. A very special man and president.
Unfortunately, after the Cold War our foreign policy veered badly off course.
We failed to develop a new vision for a new time. In fact, as time went on, our
foreign policy began to make less and less sense. Logic was replaced with
foolishness and arrogance, which led to one foreign policy disaster after
another.

They just kept coming and coming. We went from mistakes in Iraq to Egypt to
Libya, to President Obama’s line in the sand in Syria. Each of these actions
have helped to throw the region into chaos and gave ISIS the space it needs to
grow and prosper. Very bad. It all began with a dangerous idea that we could
make western democracies out of countries that had no experience or interests
in becoming a western democracy.

We tore up what institutions they had and then were surprised at what we
unleashed. Civil war, religious fanaticism, thousands of Americans and just
killed be lives, lives, lives wasted. Horribly wasted. Many trillions of
dollars were lost as a result. The vacuum was created that ISIS would fill.
Iran, too, would rush in and fill that void much to their really unjust
enrichment.

They have benefited so much, so sadly, for us. Our foreign policy is a complete
and total disaster. No vision. No purpose. No direction. No strategy. Today I
want to identify five main weaknesses in our foreign policy.

First, our resources are totally over extended. President Obama has weakened
our military by weakening our economy. He’s crippled us with wasteful spending,
massive debt, low growth, a huge trade deficit and open borders. Our
manufacturing trade deficit with the world is now approaching $1 trillion a
year.

We’re rebuilding other countries while weakening our own. Ending the theft of
American jobs will give us resources we need to rebuild our military, which has
to happen and regain our financial independence and strength. I am the only
person running for the presidency who understands this and this is a serious
problem.

I’m the only one — believe me, I know them all, I’m the only one who knows how
to fix it.

Secondly, our allies are not paying their fair share, and I’ve been talking
about this recently a lot. Our allies must contribute toward their financial,
political, and human costs, have to do it, of our tremendous security burden.
But many of them are simply not doing so.

They look at the United States as weak and forgiving and feel no obligation to
honor their agreements with us. In NATO, for instance, only 4 of 28 other
member countries besides America, are spending the minimum required 2 percent
of GDP on defense. We have spent trillions of dollars over time on planes,
missiles, ships, equipment, building up our military to provide a strong
defense for Europe and Asia.

The countries we are defending must pay for the cost of this defense, and if
not, the U.S. must be prepared to let these countries defend themselves. We
have no choice.

The whole world will be safer if our allies do their part to support our common
defense and security. A Trump administration will lead a free world that is
properly armed and funded, and funded beautifully.

Thirdly, our friends are beginning to think they can’t depend on us. We’ve had
a president who dislikes our friends and bows to our enemies, something that
we’ve never seen before in the history of our country. He negotiated a
disastrous deal with Iran, and then we watched them ignore its terms even
before the ink was dry. Iran cannot be allowed to have a nuclear weapon, cannot
be allowed. Remember that, cannot be allowed to have a nuclear weapon.

And under a Trump administration, will never, ever be allowed to have that
nuclear weapon.

All of this without even mentioning the humiliation of the United States with
Iran’s treatment of our ten captured sailors — so vividly I remember that day.
In negotiation, you must be willing to walk. The Iran deal, like so many of our
worst agreements, is the result of not being willing to leave the table.

When the other side knows you’re not going to walk, it becomes absolutely
impossible to win — you just can’t win. At the same time, your friends need to
know that you will stick by the agreements that you have with them. You’ve made
that agreement, you have to stand by it and the world will be a better place.
President Obama gutted our missile defense program and then abandoned our
missile defense plans with Poland and the Czech Republic. He supported the
ouster of a friendly regime in Egypt that had a longstanding peace treaty with
Israel, and then helped bring the Muslim Brotherhood to power in its place.

Israel, our great friend and the one true democracy in the Middle East has been
snubbed and criticized by an administration that lacks moral clarity. Just a
few days ago, Vice President Biden again criticized Israel, a force for justice
and peace, for acting as an impatient peace area in the region.

President Obama has not been a friend to Israel. He has treated Iran with
tender love and care and made it a great power. Iran has, indeed, become a
great, great power in just a very short period of time, because of what we’ve
done. All of the expense and all at the expense of Israel, our allies in the
region and very importantly, the United States itself.

We’ve picked fights with our oldest friends, and now they’re starting to look
elsewhere for help. Remember that. Not good.

Fourth, our rivals no longer respect us. In fact, they’re just as confused as
our allies, but in an even bigger problem is they don’t take us seriously
anymore. The truth is they don’t respect us. When President Obama landed in
Cuba on Air Force One, no leader was there, nobody, to greet him.

Perhaps an incident without precedent in the long and prestigious history of
Air Force One. Then amazingly, the same thing happened in Saudi Arabia. It’s
called no respect. Absolutely no respect.

Do you remember when the president made a long and expensive trip to
Copenhagen, Denmark, to get the Olympics for our country, and after this
unprecedented effort, it was announced that the United States came in fourth —
fourth place? The president of the United States making this trip —
unprecedented — comes in fourth place. He should have known the result before
making such an embarrassing commitment. We were laughed at all over the world,
as we have been many, many times.

The list of humiliations go on and on and on. President Obama watches
helplessly as North Korea increases its aggression and expands further and
further with its nuclear reach. Our president has allowed China to continue its
economic assault on American jobs and wealth, refusing to enforce trade deals
and apply leverage on China necessary to rein in North Korea. We have the
leverage. We have the power over China, economic power, and people don’t
understand it. And with that economic power, we can rein in and we can get them
to do what they have to do with North Korea, which is totally out of control.

He has even allowed China to steal government secrets with cyber attacks and
engaged in industrial espionage against the United States and its companies.
We’ve let our rivals and challengers think they can get away with anything, and
they do. They do at will. It always happens. If President Obama’s goal had been
to weaken America, he could not have done a better job.

Finally, America no longer has a clear understanding of our foreign policy
goals. Since the end of the Cold War and the breakup of the Soviet Union, we’ve
lacked a coherent foreign policy. One day, we’re bombing Libya and getting rid
of a dictator to foster democracy for civilians. The next day, we’re watching
the same civilians suffer while that country falls and absolutely falls apart.
Lives lost, massive moneys lost. The world is a different place.

We’re a humanitarian nation, but the legacy of the Obama-Clinton interventions
will be weakness, confusion and disarray, a mess. We’ve made the Middle East
more unstable and chaotic than ever before. We left Christians subject to
intense persecution and even genocide.

We have done nothing to help the Christians, nothing, and we should always be
ashamed for that, for that lack of action. Our actions in Iraq, Libya and Syria
have helped unleash ISIS, and we’re in a war against radical Islam, but
President Obama won’t even name the enemy, and unless you name the enemy, you
will never ever solve the problem.

Hillary Clinton also refuses to say the words radical Islam, even as she pushes
for a massive increase in refugees coming into our country. After Secretary
Clinton’s failed intervention in Libya, Islamic terrorists in Benghazi took
down our consulate and killed our ambassador and three brave Americans. Then,
instead of taking charge that night, Hillary Clinton decided to go home and
sleep. Incredible.

Clinton blames it all on a video, an excuse that was a total lie, proven to be
absolutely a total lie. Our ambassador was murdered and our secretary of state
misled the nation. And, by the way, she was not awake to take that call at 3
o’clock in the morning. And now ISIS is making millions and millions of dollars
a week selling Libya oil. And you know what? We don’t blockade, we don’t bomb,
we don’t do anything about it. It’s almost as if our country doesn’t even know
what’s happening, which could be a fact and could be true. This will all change
when I become president.

To our friends and allies, I say America is going to be strong again. America
is going to be reliable again. It’s going to be a great and reliable ally
again. It’s going to be a friend again. We’re going to finally have a coherent
foreign policy based upon American interests and the shared interests of our
allies.

We’re getting out of the nation-building business and instead focusing on
creating stability in the world. Our moments of greatest strength came when
politics ended at the water’s edge. We need a new rational American foreign
policy, informed by the best minds and supported by both parties, and it will
be by both parties — Democrats, Republicans, independents, everybody, as well
as by our close allies.

This is how we won the Cold War and it’s how we will win our new future
struggles, which may be many, which may be complex, but we will win if I become
president.

First, we need a long-term plan to halt the spread and reach of radical Islam.
Containing the spread of radical Islam must be a major foreign policy goal of
the United States and indeed the world. Events may require the use of military
force, but it’s also a philosophical struggle, like our long struggle in the
Cold War.

In this, we’re going to be working very closely with our allies in the Muslim
world, all of which are at risk from radical Islamic violence, attacks and
everything else. It is a dangerous world, more dangerous now than it has ever
been.

We should work — thank you.

We should work together with any nation in the region that is threatened by the
rise of radical Islam. But this has to be a two-way street. They must also be
good to us. Remember that. They have to be good to us, no longer one way. It’s
now two-way. And remember, us and all we’re doing, they have to appreciate what
we’ve done to them. We’re going to help, but they have to appreciate what we’ve
done for them. The struggle against radical Islam also takes place in our
homeland. There are scores of recent migrants inside our borders charged with
terrorism. For every case known to the public, there are dozens and dozens
more. We must stop importing extremism through senseless immigration policies.
We have no idea where these people are coming from. There’s no documentation.
There’s no paperwork. There’s nothing. We have to be smart. We have to be
vigilant.

A pause for reassessment will help us to prevent the next San Bernardino or
frankly, much worse. All you have to do is look at the World Trade Center and
September 11th, one of the great catastrophes, in my opinion, the single
greatest military catastrophe in the history of our country; worse than Pearl
Harbor because you take a look at what’s happened, and citizens were attacked,
as opposed to the military being attacked — one of the true great catastrophes.

And then there’s ISIS. I have a simple message for them. Their days are
numbered. I won’t tell them where and I won’t tell them how. We must...

we must as a nation be more unpredictable. We are totally predictable. We tell
everything. We’re sending troops. We tell them. We’re sending something else.
We have a news conference. We have to be unpredictable. And we have to be
unpredictable starting now.

But they’re going to be gone. ISIS will be gone if I’m elected president. And
they’ll be gone quickly. They will be gone very, very quickly.

Secondly, we have to rebuild our military and our economy. The Russians and
Chinese have rapidly expanded their military capability, but look at what’s
happened to us. Our nuclear weapons arsenal, our ultimate deterrent, has been
allowed to atrophy and is desperately in need of modernization and renewal. And
it has to happen immediately. Our active duty armed forces have shrunk from 2
million in 1991 to about 1.3 million today. The Navy has shrunk from over 500
ships to 272 ships during this same period of time. The Air Force is about
one-third smaller than 1991. Pilots flying B-52s in combat missions today.
These planes are older than virtually everybody in this room.

And what are we doing about this? President Obama has proposed a 2017 defense
budget that in real dollars, cuts nearly 25 percent from what we were spending
in 2011. Our military is depleted and we’re asking our generals and military
leaders to worry about global warming.

We will spend what we need to rebuild our military. It is the cheapest, single
investment we can make. We will develop, build and purchase the best equipment
known to mankind. Our military dominance must be unquestioned, and I mean
unquestioned, by anybody and everybody.

But we will look for savings and spend our money wisely. In this time of
mounting debt, right now we have so much debt that nobody even knows how to
address the problem. But I do. No one dollar can be wasted. Not one single
dollar can we waste. We’re also going to have to change our trade, immigration
and economic policies to make our economy strong again. And to put Americans
first again.

This will ensure that our own workers, right here in America, get the jobs and
higher pay that will grow our tax revenues, increase our economic might as a
nation, make us strong financially again. So, so important. We need to think
smart about areas where our technological superiority, and nobody comes close,
gives us an edge.

This includes 3D printing, artificial intelligence and cyber warfare. A great
country also takes care of its warriors. Our commitment to them is absolute,
and I mean absolute. A Trump administration will give our servicemen and women
the best equipment and support in the world when they serve and where they
serve. And the best care in the world when they return as veterans and they
come back home to civilian life. Our veterans...

Our veterans have not been treated fairly or justly. These are our great people
and we must treat them fairly. We must even treat them really, really well and
that will happen under the Trump administration.

Finally, we must develop a foreign policy based on American interests.
Businesses do not succeed when they lose sight of their core interests and
neither do countries. Look at what happened in the 1990s. Our embassies in
Kenya and Tanzania — and this was a horrible time for us — were attacked. and
17 brave sailors were killed on the U.S.S. Cole.

And what did we do? It seemed we put more effort into adding China into the
World Trade organization, which has been a total disaster for the United
States. Frankly, we spent more time on that than we did in stopping Al Qaeda.
We even had an opportunity to take out Osama bin Laden and we didn’t do it

And then we got hit at the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. Again, the
worst attack on our country in its history. Our foreign policy goals must be
based on America’s core national security interests. And the following will be
my priorities.

In the Middle East our goals must be, and I mean must be, to defeat terrorists
and promote regional stability, not radical change. We need to be clearsighted
about the groups that will never be anything other than enemies. And believe
me, we have groups that no matter what you do, they will be the enemy.: We have
to be smart enough to recognize who those groups are, who those people are, and
not help them. And we must only be generous to those that prove they are indeed
our friends.

We desire to live peacefully and in friendship with Russia and China. We have
serious differences with these two nations, and must regard them with open
eyes, but we are not bound to be adversaries. We should seek common ground
based on shared interests.

Russia, for instance, has also seen the horror of Islamic terrorism. I believe
an easing of tensions, and improved relations with Russia from a position of
strength only is possible, absolutely possible. Common sense says this cycle,
this horrible cycle of hostility must end and ideally will end soon. Good for
both countries.

Some say the Russians won’t be reasonable. I intend to find out. If we can’t
make a deal under my administration, a deal that’s great — not good, great —
for America, but also good for Russia, then we will quickly walk from the
table. It’s as simple as that. We’re going to find out.

Fixing our relations with China is another important step — and really toward
creating an even more prosperous period of time. China respects strength and by
letting them take advantage of us economically, which they are doing like never
before, we have lost all of their respect.

We have a massive trade deficit with China, a deficit that we have to find a
way quickly, and I mean quickly, to balance. A strong and smart America is an
America that will find a better friend in China, better than we have right now.
Look at what China is doing in the South China Sea. They’re not supposed to be
doing it.

No respect for this country or this president. We can both benefit or we can
both go our separate ways. If need be, that’s what’s going to have to happen.

After I’m elected president, I will also call for a summit with our NATO allies
and a separate summit with our Asian allies. In these summits, we will not only
discuss a rebalancing of financial commitments, but take a fresh look at how we
can adopt new strategies for tackling our common challenges. For instance, we
will discuss how we can upgrade NATO’s outdated mission and structure, grown
out of the Cold War to confront our shared challenges, including migration and
Islamic terrorism.

I will not hesitate to deploy military force when there is no alternative. But
if America fights, it must only fight to win.

I will never sent our finest into battle unless necessary, and I mean
absolutely necessary, and will only do so if we have a plan for victory with a
capital V.

Our goal is peace and prosperity, not war and destruction. The best way to
achieve those goals is through a disciplined, deliberate and consistent foreign
policy. With President Obama and Secretary Clinton we’ve had the exact opposite
— a reckless, rudderless and aimless foreign policy, one that has blazed the
path of destruction in its wake.

After losing thousands of lives and spending trillions of dollars, we are in
far worst shape in the Middle East than ever, ever before. I challenge anyone
to explain the strategic foreign policy vision of Obama/Clinton. It has been a
complete and total disaster.

I will also be prepared to deploy America’s economic resources. Financial
leverage and sanctions can be very, very persuasive, but we need to use them
selectively and with total determination. Our power will be used if others do
not play by the rules. In other words, if they do not treat us fairly. Our
friends and enemies must know that if I draw a line in the sand, I will enforce
that line in the sand. Believe me.

However, unlike other candidates for the presidency, war and aggression will
not be my first instinct. You cannot have a foreign policy without diplomacy. A
superpower understands that caution and restraint are really truly signs of
strength. Although not in government service, I was totally against the war in
Iraq, very proudly, saying for many years that it would destabilize the Middle
East. Sadly, I was correct, and the biggest beneficiary has been has been Iran,
who is systematically taking over Iraq and gaining access to their very rich
oil reserves, something it has wanted to do for decades.

And now, to top it off, we have ISIS. My goal is to establish a foreign policy
that will endure for several generations. That’s why I also look and have to
look for talented experts with approaches and practical ideas, rather than
surrounding myself with those who have perfect résumés but very little to brag
about except responsibility for a long history of failed policies and continued
losses at war. We have to look to new people.

We have to look to new people because many of the old people frankly don’t know
what they’re doing, even though they may look awfully good writing in The New
York Times or being watched on television.

Finally, I will work with our allies to reinvigorate Western values and
institutions. Instead of trying to spread universal values that not everybody
shares or wants, we should understand that strengthening and promoting Western
civilization and its accomplishments will do more to inspire positive reforms
around the world than military interventions.

These are my goals as president. I will seek a foreign policy that all
Americans, whatever their party, can support, so important, and which our
friends and allies will respect and totally welcome. The world must know that
we do not go abroad in search of enemies, that we are always happy when old
enemies become friends and when old friends become allies, that’s what we want.
We want them to be our allies.

We want the world to be — we want to bring peace to the world. Too much
destruction out there, too many destructive weapons. The power of weaponry is
the single biggest problem that we have today in the world.

To achieve these goals, Americans must have confidence in their country and its
leadership. Again, many Americans must wonder why we our politicians seem more
interested in defending the borders of foreign countries than in defending
their own. Americans.

Americans must know that we’re putting the American people first again on
trade.

So true. On trade, on immigration, on foreign policy. The jobs, incomes and
security of the American worker will always be my first priority.

No country has ever prospered that failed to put its own interests first. Both
our friends and our enemies put their countries above ours and we, while being
fair to them, must start doing the same. We will no longer surrender this
country or its people to the false song of globalism. The nation-state remains
the true foundation for happiness and harmony. I am skeptical of international
unions that tie us up and bring America down and will never enter.

And under my administration, we will never enter America into any agreement
that reduces our ability to control our own affairs.

NAFTA, as an example, has been a total disaster for the United States and has
emptied our states — literally emptied our states of our manufacturing and our
jobs. And I’ve just gotten to see it. I’ve toured Pennsylvania. I’ve toured New
York. I’ve toured so many of the states. They have been cleaned out. Their
manufacturing is gone.

Never again, only the reverse — and I have to say this strongly — never again;
only the reverse will happen. We will keep our jobs and bring in new ones.
There will be consequences for the companies that leave the United States only
to exploit it later. They fire the people. They take advantage of the United
States. There will be consequences for those companies. Never again.

Under a Trump administration, no American citizen will ever again feel that
their needs come second to the citizens of a foreign country.

I will view as president the world through the clear lens of American
interests. I will be America’s greatest defender and most loyal champion. We
will not apologize for becoming successful again, but will instead embrace the
unique heritage that makes us who we are.

The world is most peaceful and most prosperous when America is strongest.
America will continue and continue forever to play the role of peacemaker. We
will always help save lives and indeed humanity itself, but to play the role,
we must make America strong again.

And always — always, always, we must make, and we have to look at it from every
angle, and we have no choice, we must make America respected again. We must
make America truly wealthy again. And we must — we have to and we will make
America great again. And if we do that — and if we do that, perhaps this
century can be the most peaceful and prosperous the world has ever, ever known.

It is great to be here. I'd like to thank Alumisource and all the amazing
workers here for hosting us.

Today, I am going to talk about how to Make America Wealthy Again.

We are thirty miles from Steel City. Pittsburgh played a central role in
building our nation.

The legacy of Pennsylvania steelworkers lives in the bridges, railways and
skyscrapers that make up our great American landscape.

But our workers' loyalty was repaid with betrayal.

Our politicians have aggressively pursued a policy of globalization - moving
our jobs, our wealth and our factories to Mexico and overseas.

Globalization has made the financial elite who donate to politicians very
wealthy. But it has left millions of our workers with nothing but poverty and
heartache.

When subsidized foreign steel is dumped into our markets, threatening our
factories, the politicians do nothing.

For years, they watched on the sidelines as our jobs vanished and our
communities were plunged into depression-level unemployment.

Many of these areas have still never recovered.

Our politicians took away from the people their means of making a living and
supporting their families.

Skilled craftsmen and tradespeople and factory workers have seen the jobs they
loved shipped thousands of miles away.

Many Pennsylvania towns once thriving and humming are now in a state despair.

This wave of globalization has wiped out our middle class.

It doesn't have to be this way. We can turn it all around - and we can turn it
around fast.

But if we're going to deliver real change, we're going to have to reject the
campaign of fear and intimidation being pushed by powerful corporations, media
elites, and political dynasties.

The people who rigged the system for their benefit will do anything - and say
anything - to keep things exactly as they are.

The people who rigged the system are supporting Hillary Clinton because they
know as long as she is in charge nothing will ever change.

The inner cities will remain poor.

The factories will remain closed.

The borders will remain open.

The special interests will remain firmly in control.

Hillary Clinton and her friends in global finance want to scare America into
thinking small - and they want to scare the American people out of voting for a
better future.

My campaign has the opposite message.

I want you to imagine how much better your life can be if we start believing in
America again.

I want you to imagine how much better our future can be if we declare
independence from the elites who've led us to one financial and foreign policy
disaster after another.

Our friends in Britain recently voted to take back control of their economy,
politics and borders.

I was on the right side of that issue - with the people - while Hillary, as
always, stood with the elites, and both she and president Obama predicted that
one wrong.

Now it's time for the American people to take back their future.

That's the choice we face. We can either give in to Hillary Clinton's campaign
of fear, or we can choose to Believe In America.

We lost our way when we stopped believing in our country.

America became the world's dominant economy by becoming the world's dominant
producer.

The wealth this created was shared broadly, creating the biggest middle class
the world had ever known.

But then America changed its policy from promoting development in America, to
promoting development in other nations.

We allowed foreign countries to subsidize their goods, devalue their
currencies, violate their agreements, and cheat in every way imaginable.

Trillions of our dollars and millions of our jobs flowed overseas as a result.

I have visited cities and towns across this country where a third or even half
of manufacturing jobs have been wiped out in the last 20 years.

Today, we import nearly $800 billion more in goods than we export.

This is not some natural disaster. It is politician-made disaster.

It is the consequence of a leadership class that worships globalism over
Americanism.

This is a direct affront to our Founding Fathers, who wanted America to be
strong, independent and free.

Our Founding Fathers Understood Trade

George Washington said that "the promotion of domestic manufactur[ing] will be
among the first consequences to flow from an energetic government.”

Alexander Hamilton spoke frequently of the "expediency of encouraging
manufactur[ing] in the United States." The first Republican President, Abraham
Lincoln, warned that: "The abandonment of the protective policy by the American
government… must produce want and ruin among our people."

Our original Constitution did not even have an income tax. Instead, it had
tariffs - emphasizing taxation of foreign, not domestic, production.

Yet today, 240 years after the Revolution, we have turned things completely
upside-down.

We tax and regulate and restrict our companies to death, then we allow foreign
countries that cheat to export their goods to us tax-free.

As a result, we have become more dependent on foreign countries than ever
before.

Ladies and Gentlemen, it’s time to declare our economic independence once
again.

That means reversing two of the worst legacies of the Clinton years.

America has lost nearly one-third of its manufacturing jobs since 1997 - even
as the country has increased its population by 50 million people.

At the center of this catastrophe are two trade deals pushed by Bill and
Hillary Clinton.

First, the North American Free Trade Agreement, or NAFTA. Second, China's entry
into the World Trade Organization.

NAFTA was the worst trade deal in history, and China's entrance into the World
Trade Organization has enabled the greatest jobs theft in history.

It was Bill Clinton who signed NAFTA in 1993, and Hillary Clinton who supported
it.

It was also Bill Clinton who lobbied for China's disastrous entry into the
World Trade Organization, and Hillary Clinton who backed that terrible
agreement.

Then, as Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton stood by idly while China cheated
on its currency, added another trillion dollars to our trade deficits, and
stole hundreds of billions of dollars in our intellectual property.

The city of Pittsburgh, and the State of Pennsylvania, have lost one-third of
their manufacturing jobs since the Clintons put China into the WTO.

Fifty thousand factories across America have shut their doors in that time.

Almost half of our entire manufacturing trade deficit in goods with the world
is the result of trade with China.

It was also Hillary Clinton, as Secretary of State, who shoved us into a
job-killing deal with South Korea in 2012.

As reported by the Economic Policy Institute in May, this deal doubled our
trade deficit with South Korea and destroyed nearly 100,000 American jobs.

As Bernie Sanders said, Hillary Clinton "Voted for virtually every trade
agreement that has cost the workers of this country millions of jobs.”

Trade reform, and the negotiation of great trade deals, is the quickest way to
bring our jobs back.

To understand why trade reform creates jobs, we need to understand how all
nations grow and prosper.

Massive trade deficits subtract directly from our Gross Domestic Product.

From 1947 to 2001 - a span of over five decades - our inflation-adjusted gross
domestic product grew at a rate of 3.5%.

However, since 2002 - the year after we fully opened our markets to Chinese
imports - that GDP growth rate has been cut almost in half.

What does this mean for Americans? For every one percent of GDP growth we fail
to generate in any given year, we also fail to create over one million jobs.

America's "job creation deficit" due to slower growth since 2002 is well over
20 million jobs - and that's just about the number of jobs our country needs
right now to put America back to work at decent wages.

The Transpacific-Partnership is the greatest danger yet.

The TPP would be the death blow for American manufacturing.

It would give up all of our economic leverage to an international commission
that would put the interests of foreign countries above our own.

It would further open our markets to aggressive currency cheaters. It would
make it easier for our trading competitors to ship cheap subsidized goods into
U.S. markets - while allowing foreign countries to continue putting barriers in
front of our exports.

The TPP would lower tariffs on foreign cars, while leaving in place the foreign
practices that keep American cars from being sold overseas. The TPP even
created a backdoor for China to supply car parts for automobiles made in
Mexico.

The agreement would also force American workers to compete directly against
workers from Vietnam, one of the lowest wage countries on Earth.

Not only will the TPP undermine our economy, but it will undermine our
independence.

The TPP creates a new international commission that makes decisions the
American people can't veto.

These commissions are great Hillary Clinton’s Wall Street funders who can spend
vast amounts of money to influence the outcomes.

It should be no surprise then that Hillary Clinton, according to Bloomberg,
took a “leading part in drafting the Trans-Pacific Partnership”.

She praised or pushed the TPP on 45 separate occasions, and even called it the
“gold standard”.

Hillary Clinton was totally for the TPP just a short while ago, but when she
saw my stance, which is totally against, she was shamed into saying she would
be against it too – but have no doubt, she will immediately approve it if it is
put before her, guaranteed.

She will do this just as she has betrayed American workers for Wall Street
throughout her career.

Here’s how it would go: she would make a small token change, declare the pact
fixed, and ram it through.

That’s why Hillary is now only saying she has problems with the TPP “in its
current form,” – ensuring that she can rush to embrace it again at her earliest
opportunity.

If the media doesn’t believe me, I have a challenge for you. Ask Hillary
Clinton if she is willing to withdraw from the TPP her first day in office and
unconditionally rule out its passage in any form.

There is no way to “fix” the TPP. We need bilateral trade deals. We do not need
to enter into another massive international agreement that ties us up and binds
us down.

A Trump Administration will change our failed trade policy - quickly

Here are 7 steps I would pursue right away to bring back our jobs.

One: I am going to withdraw the United States from the Trans-Pacific
Partnership, which has not yet been ratified.

Two: I'm going to appoint the toughest and smartest trade negotiators to fight
on behalf of American workers.

Three: I'm going to direct the Secretary of Commerce to identify every
violation of trade agreements a foreign country is currently using to harm our
workers. I will then direct all appropriate agencies to use every tool under
American and international law to end these abuses.

Four: I'm going tell our NAFTA partners that I intend to immediately
renegotiate the terms of that agreement to get a better deal for our workers.
And I don't mean just a little bit better, I mean a lot better. If they do not
agree to a renegotiation, then I will submit notice under Article 2205 of the
NAFTA agreement that America intends to withdraw from the deal.

Five: I am going to instruct my Treasury Secretary to label China a currency
manipulator. Any country that devalues their currency in order to take
advantage of the United States will be met with sharply

Six: I am going to instruct the U.S. Trade Representative to bring trade cases
against China, both in this country and at the WTO. China's unfair subsidy
behavior is prohibited by the terms of its entrance to the WTO, and I intend to
enforce those rules.

Seven: If China does not stop its illegal activities, including its theft of
American trade secrets, I will use every lawful presidential power to remedy
trade disputes, including the application of tariffs consistent with Section
201 and 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 and Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act
of 1962.

President Reagan deployed similar trade measures when motorcycle and
semiconductor imports threatened U.S. industry. His tariff on Japanese
motorcycles was 45% and his tariff to shield America’s semiconductor industry
was 100%.

Hillary Clinton, and her campaign of fear, will try to spread the lie that
these actions will start a trade war. She has it completely backwards.

Hillary Clinton unleashed a trade war against the American worker when she
supported one terrible trade deal after another – from NAFTA to China to South
Korea.

A Trump Administration will end that war by getting a fair deal for the
American people.

The era of economic surrender will finally be over.

A new era of prosperity will finally begin.

America will be independent once more.

Under a Trump Presidency, the American worker will finally have a President who
will protect them and fight for them.

We will stand up to trade cheating anywhere and everywhere it threatens an
American job.

We will make America the best place in the world to start a business, hire
workers, and open a factory.

This includes massive tax reform to lift the crushing burdens on American
workers and businesses.

We will also get rid of wasteful rules and regulations which are destroying our
job creation capacity.

Many people think that these regulations are an even greater impediment than
the fact that we are one of the highest taxed nations in the world.

We are also going to fully capture America’s tremendous energy capacity. This
will create vast profits for our workers and begin reducing our deficit.
Hillary Clinton wants to shut down energy production and shut down the mines.

A Trump Administration will also ensure that we start using American steel for
American infrastructure.

Just like the American steel from Pennsylvania that built the Empire State
building.

It will be American steel that will fortify American's crumbling bridges.

It will be American steel that sends our skyscrapers soaring into the sky.

It will be American steel that rebuilds our inner cities.

It will be American hands that remake this country, and it will be American
energy - mined from American resources - that powers this country.

It will be American workers who are hired to do the job.

We are going to put American-produced steel back into the backbone of our
country. This alone will create massive numbers of jobs.

On trade, on immigration, on foreign policy, we are going to put America First
again.

We are going to make America wealthy again.

We are going to reject Hillary Clinton's politics of fear, futility, and
incompetence.

We are going to embrace the possibilities of change.

It is time to believe in the future.

It is time to believe in each other.

It is time to Believe In America.

This Is How We Are Going To Make America Great Again – For All Americans.

We Are Going To Make America Great Again For Everyone – Greater Than Ever
Before.

Wow. Whoa. That is some group of people. Thousands.

So nice, thank you very much. That’s really nice. Thank you. It’s great to be
at Trump Tower. It’s great to be in a wonderful city, New York. And it’s an
honor to have everybody here. This is beyond anybody’s expectations. There’s
been no crowd like this.

And, I can tell, some of the candidates, they went in. They didn’t know the
air-conditioner didn’t work. They sweated like dogs.

They didn’t know the room was too big, because they didn’t have anybody there.
How are they going to beat ISIS? I don’t think it’s gonna happen.

Our country is in serious trouble. We don’t have victories anymore. We used to
have victories, but we don’t have them. When was the last time anybody saw us
beating, let’s say, China in a trade deal? They kill us. I beat China all the
time. All the time.

When did we beat Japan at anything? They send their cars over by the millions,
and what do we do? When was the last time you saw a Chevrolet in Tokyo? It
doesn’t exist, folks. They beat us all the time.

When do we beat Mexico at the border? They’re laughing at us, at our stupidity.
And now they are beating us economically. They are not our friend, believe me.
But they’re killing us economically.

The U.S. has become a dumping ground for everybody else’s problems.

Thank you. It’s true, and these are the best and the finest. When Mexico sends
its people, they’re not sending their best. They’re not sending you. They’re
not sending you. They’re sending people that have lots of problems, and they’re
bringing those problems with us. They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing
crime. They’re rapists. And some, I assume, are good people.

But I speak to border guards and they tell us what we’re getting. And it only
makes common sense. It only makes common sense. They’re sending us not the
right people.

It’s coming from more than Mexico. It’s coming from all over South and Latin
America, and it’s coming probably — probably — from the Middle East. But we
don’t know. Because we have no protection and we have no competence, we don’t
know what’s happening. And it’s got to stop and it’s got to stop fast.

Islamic terrorism is eating up large portions of the Middle East. They’ve
become rich. I’m in competition with them.

They just built a hotel in Syria. Can you believe this? They built a hotel.
When I have to build a hotel, I pay interest. They don’t have to pay interest,
because they took the oil that, when we left Iraq, I said we should’ve taken.

So now ISIS has the oil, and what they don’t have, Iran has. And in 19 — and I
will tell you this, and I said it very strongly, years ago, I said — and I love
the military, and I want to have the strongest military that we’ve ever had,
and we need it more now than ever. But I said, “Don’t hit Iraq,” because you’re
going to totally destabilize the Middle East. Iran is going to take over the
Middle East, Iran and somebody else will get the oil, and it turned out that
Iran is now taking over Iraq. Think of it. Iran is taking over Iraq, and
they’re taking it over big league.

We spent $2 trillion in Iraq, $2 trillion. We lost thousands of lives,
thousands in Iraq. We have wounded soldiers, who I love, I love — they’re great
— all over the place, thousands and thousands of wounded soldiers.

And we have nothing. We can’t even go there. We have nothing. And every time we
give Iraq equipment, the first time a bullet goes off in the air, they leave
it.

Last week, I read 2,300 Humvees — these are big vehicles — were left behind for
the enemy. 2,000? You would say maybe two, maybe four? 2,300 sophisticated
vehicles, they ran, and the enemy took them.

Last quarter, it was just announced our gross domestic product — a sign of
strength, right? But not for us. It was below zero. Whoever heard of this? It’s
never below zero.

Our labor participation rate was the worst since 1978. But think of it, GDP
below zero, horrible labor participation rate.

And our real unemployment is anywhere from 18 to 20 percent. Don’t believe the
5.6. Don’t believe it.

That’s right. A lot of people up there can’t get jobs. They can’t get jobs,
because there are no jobs, because China has our jobs and Mexico has our jobs.
They all have jobs.

But the real number, the real number is anywhere from 18 to 19 and maybe even
21 percent, and nobody talks about it, because it’s a statistic that’s full of
nonsense.

Our enemies are getting stronger and stronger by the way, and we as a country
are getting weaker. Even our nuclear arsenal doesn’t work.

It came out recently they have equipment that is 30 years old. They don’t know
if it worked. And I thought it was horrible when it was broadcast on
television, because boy, does that send signals to Putin and all of the other
people that look at us and they say, “That is a group of people, and that is a
nation that truly has no clue. They don’t know what they’re doing. They don’t
know what they’re doing.”

We have a disaster called the big lie: Obamacare. Obamacare.

Yesterday, it came out that costs are going for people up 29, 39, 49, and even
55 percent, and deductibles are through the roof. You have to be hit by a
tractor, literally, a tractor, to use it, because the deductibles are so high,
it’s virtually useless. It’s virtually useless. It is a disaster. And
remember the $5 billion Web site? $5 billion we spent on a Web site, and to
this day it doesn’t work. A $5 billion Web site.

I have so many Web sites, I have them all over the place. I hire people, they
do a Web site. It costs me $3. $5 billion Web site.

Well, you need somebody, because politicians are all talk, no action. Nothing’s
gonna get done. They will not bring us — believe me — to the promised land.
They will not.

As an example, I’ve been on the circuit making speeches, and I hear my fellow
Republicans. And they’re wonderful people. I like them. They all want me to
support them. They don’t know how to bring it about. They come up to my office.
I’m meeting with three of them in the next week. And they don’t know — “Are you
running? Are you not running? Could we have your support? What do we do? How do
we do it?”

I like them. And I hear their speeches. And they don’t talk jobs and they don’t
talk China. When was the last time you heard China is killing us? They’re
devaluing their currency to a level that you wouldn’t believe. It makes it
impossible for our companies to compete, impossible. They’re killing us.

But you don’t hear that from anybody else. You don’t hear it from anybody else.
And I watch the speeches.

I watch the speeches of these people, and they say the sun will rise, the moon
will set, all sorts of wonderful things will happen. And people are saying,
“What’s going on? I just want a job. Just get me a job. I don’t need the
rhetoric. I want a job.”

And that’s what’s happening. And it’s going to get worse, because remember,
Obamacare really kicks in in ’16, 2016. Obama is going to be out playing golf.
He might be on one of my courses. I would invite him, I actually would say. I
have the best courses in the world, so I’d say, you what, if he wants to — I
have one right next to the White House, right on the Potomac. If he’d like to
play, that’s fine.

In fact, I’d love him to leave early and play, that would be a very good thing.

But Obamacare kicks in in 2016. Really big league. It is going to be amazingly
destructive. Doctors are quitting. I have a friend who’s a doctor, and he said
to me the other day, “Donald, I never saw anything like it. I have more
accountants than I have nurses. It’s a disaster. My patients are beside
themselves. They had a plan that was good. They have no plan now.”

We have to repeal Obamacare, and it can be — and — and it can be replaced with
something much better for everybody. Let it be for everybody. But much better
and much less expensive for people and for the government. And we can do it.

So I’ve watched the politicians. I’ve dealt with them all my life. If you can’t
make a good deal with a politician, then there’s something wrong with you.
You’re certainly not very good. And that’s what we have= representing us. They
will never make America great again. They don’t even have a chance. They’re
controlled fully — they’re controlled fully by the lobbyists, by the donors,
and by the special interests, fully.

Yes, they control them. Hey, I have lobbyists. I have to tell you. I have
lobbyists that can produce anything for me. They’re great. But you know what?
it won’t happen. It won’t happen. Because we have to stop doing things for some
people, but for this country, it’s destroying our country. We have to stop, and
it has to stop now.

Now, our country needs — our country needs a truly great leader, and we need a
truly great leader now. We need a leader that wrote “The Art of the Deal.”

We need a leader that can bring back our jobs, can bring back our
manufacturing, can bring back our military, can take care of our vets. Our vets
have been abandoned.

And we also need a cheerleader.

You know, when President Obama was elected, I said, “Well, the one thing, I
think he’ll do well. I think he’ll be a great cheerleader for the country. I
think he’d be a great spirit.”

He was vibrant. He was young. I really thought that he would be a great
cheerleader.

He’s not a leader. That’s true. You’re right about that.

But he wasn’t a cheerleader. He’s actually a negative force. He’s been a
negative force. He wasn’t a cheerleader; he was the opposite.

We need somebody that can take the brand of the United States and make it great
again. It’s not great again.

We need — we need somebody — we need somebody that literally will take this
country and make it great again. We can do that.

And, I will tell you, I love my life. I have a wonderful family. They’re
saying, “Dad, you’re going to do something that’s going to be so tough.”

You know, all of my life, I’ve heard that a truly successful person, a really,
really successful person and even modestly successful cannot run for public
office. Just can’t happen. And yet that’s the kind of mindset that you need to
make this country great again.

So ladies and gentlemen…

I am officially running…

… for president of the United States, and we are going to make our country
great again.

It can happen. Our country has tremendous potential. We have tremendous people.

We have people that aren’t working. We have people that have no incentive to
work. But they’re going to have incentive to work, because the greatest social
program is a job. And they’ll be proud, and they’ll love it, and they’ll make
much more than they would’ve ever made, and they’ll be — they’ll be doing so
well, and we’re going to be thriving as a country, thriving. It can happen.

I will be the greatest jobs president that God ever created. I tell you that.

I’ll bring back our jobs from China, from Mexico, from Japan, from so many
places. I’ll bring back our jobs, and I’ll bring back our money.

Right now, think of this: We owe China $1.3 trillion. We owe Japan more than
that. So they come in, they take our jobs, they take our money, and then they
loan us back the money, and we pay them in interest, and then the dollar goes
up so their deal’s even better.

How stupid are our leaders? How stupid are these politicians to allow this to
happen? How stupid are they?

I’m going to tell you — thank you. I’m going to tell you a couple of stories
about trade, because I’m totally against the trade bill for a number of
reasons.

Number one, the people negotiating don’t have a clue. Our president doesn’t
have a clue. He’s a bad negotiator.

He’s the one that did Bergdahl. We get Bergdahl, they get five killer
terrorists that everybody wanted over there.

We get Bergdahl. We get a traitor. We get a no-good traitor, and they get the
five people that they wanted for years, and those people are now back on the
battlefield trying to kill us. That’s the negotiator we have.

Take a look at the deal he’s making with Iran. He makes that deal, Israel maybe
won’t exist very long. It’s a disaster, and we have to protect Israel. But…

So we need people — I’m a free trader. But the problem with free trade is you
need really talented people to negotiate for you. If you don’t have talented
people, if you don’t have great leadership, if you don’t have people that know
business, not just a political hack that got the job because he made a
contribution to a campaign, which is the way all jobs, just about, are gotten,
free trade terrible.

Free trade can be wonderful if you have smart people, but we have people that
are stupid. We have people that aren’t smart. And we have people that are
controlled by special interests. And it’s just not going to work.

So, here’s a couple of stories happened recently. A friend of mine is a great
manufacturer. And, you know, China comes over and they dump all their stuff,
and I buy it. I buy it, because, frankly, I have an obligation to buy it,
because they devalue their currency so brilliantly, they just did it recently,
and nobody thought they could do it again.

But with all our problems with Russia, with all our problems with everything —
everything, they got away with it again. And it’s impossible for our people
here to compete.

So I want to tell you this story. A friend of mine who’s a great manufacturer,
calls me up a few weeks ago. He’s very upset. I said, “What’s your problem?”

He said, “You know, I make great product.”

And I said, “I know. I know that because I buy the product.”

He said, “I can’t get it into China. They won’t accept it. I sent a boat over
and they actually sent it back. They talked about environmental, they talked
about all sorts of crap that had nothing to do with it.”

I said, “Oh, wait a minute, that’s terrible. Does anyone know this?”

He said, “Yeah, they do it all the time with other people.”

I said, “They send it back?”

“Yeah. So I finally got it over there and they charged me a big tariff. They’re
not supposed to be doing that. I told them.”

Now, they do charge you tariff on trucks, when we send trucks and other things
over there.

Ask Boeing. They wanted Boeing’s secrets. They wanted their patents and all
their secrets before they agreed to buy planes from Boeing.

Hey, I’m not saying they’re stupid. I like China. I sell apartments for — I
just sold an apartment for $15 million to somebody from China. Am I supposed to
dislike them? I own a big chunk of the Bank of America Building at 1290 Avenue
of the Americas, that I got from China in a war. Very valuable.

I love China. The biggest bank in the world is from China. You know where their
United States headquarters is located? In this building, in Trump Tower. I love
China. People say, “Oh, you don’t like China?”

No, I love them. But their leaders are much smarter than our leaders, and we
can’t sustain ourself with that. There’s too much — it’s like — it’s like take
the New England Patriots and Tom Brady and have them play your high school
football team. That’s the difference between China’s leaders and our leaders.

They are ripping us. We are rebuilding China. We’re rebuilding many countries.
China, you go there now, roads, bridges, schools, you never saw anything like
it. They have bridges that make the George Washington Bridge look like small
potatoes. And they’re all over the place.

We have all the cards, but we don’t know how to use them. We don’t even know
that we have the cards, because our leaders don’t understand the game. We could
turn off that spigot by charging them tax until they behave properly.

Now they’re going militarily. They’re building a military island in the middle
of the South China sea. A military island. Now, our country could never do that
because we’d have to get environmental clearance, and the environmentalist
wouldn’t let our country — we would never build in an ocean. They built it in
about one year, this massive military port.

They’re building up their military to a point that is very scary. You have a
problem with ISIS. You have a bigger problem with China.

And, in my opinion, the new China, believe it or not, in terms of trade, is
Mexico.

So this man tells me about the manufacturing. I say, “That’s a terrible story.
I hate to hear it.”

But I have another one, Ford.

So Mexico takes a company, a car company that was going to build in Tennessee,
rips it out. Everybody thought the deal was dead. Reported it in the Wall
Street Journal recently. Everybody thought it was a done deal. It’s going in
and that’s going to be it, going into Tennessee. Great state, great people.

All of a sudden, at the last moment, this big car manufacturer, foreign,
announces they’re not going to Tennessee. They’re gonna spend their $1 billion
in Mexico instead. Not good.

Now, Ford announces a few weeks ago that Ford is going to build a $2.5 billion
car and truck and parts manufacturing plant in Mexico. $2.5 billion, it’s going
to be one of the largest in the world. Ford. Good company.

So I announced that I’m running for president. I would…

… one of the early things I would do, probably before I even got in — and I
wouldn’t even use — you know, I have — I know the smartest negotiators in the
world. I know the good ones. I know the bad ones. I know the overrated ones.

You get a lot of them that are overrated. They’re not good. They think they
are. They get good stories, because the newspapers get buffaloed (ph). But
they’re not good.

But I know the negotiators in the world, and I put them one for each country.
Believe me, folks. We will do very, very well, very, very well.

But I wouldn’t even waste my time with this one. I would call up the head of
Ford, who I know. If I was president, I’d say, “Congratulations. I understand
that you’re building a nice $2.5 billion car factory in Mexico and that you’re
going to take your cars and sell them to the United States zero tax, just flow
them across the border.”

And you say to yourself, “How does that help us,” right? “How does that help
us? Where is that good”? It’s not.

So I would say, “Congratulations. That’s the good news. Let me give you the bad
news. Every car and every truck and every part manufactured in this plant that
comes across the border, we’re going to charge you a 35-percent tax, and that
tax is going to be paid simultaneously with the transaction, and that’s it.

Now, here’s what is going to happen. If it’s not me in the position, it’s one
of these politicians that we’re running against, you know, the 400 people that
we’re (inaudible). And here’s what’s going to happen. They’re not so stupid.
They know it’s not a good thing, and they may even be upset by it. But then
they’re going to get a call from the donors or probably from the lobbyist for
Ford and say, “You can’t do that to Ford, because Ford takes care of me and I
take care of you, and you can’t do that to Ford.”

And guess what? No problem. They’re going to build in Mexico. They’re going to
take away thousands of jobs. It’s very bad for us.

So under President Trump, here’s what would happen:

The head of Ford will call me back, I would say within an hour after I told
them the bad news. But it could be he’d want to be cool, and he’ll wait until
the next day. You know, they want to be a little cool.

And he’ll say, “Please, please, please.” He’ll beg for a little while, and I’ll
say, “No interest.” Then he’ll call all sorts of political people, and I’ll
say, “Sorry, fellas. No interest,” because I don’t need anybody’s money. It’s
nice. I don’t need anybody’s money.

I’m using my own money. I’m not using the lobbyists. I’m not using donors. I
don’t care. I’m really rich.

And by the way, I’m not even saying that in a — that’s the kind of mindset,
that’s the kind of thinking you need for this country.

So — because we got to make the country rich.

It sounds crass. Somebody said, “Oh, that’s crass.” It’s not crass.

We got $18 trillion in debt. We got nothing but problems.

We got a military that needs equipment all over the place. We got nuclear
weapons that are obsolete.

We’ve got nothing. We’ve got Social Security that’s going to be destroyed if
somebody like me doesn’t bring money into the country. All these other people
want to cut the hell out of it. I’m not going to cut it at all; I’m going to
bring money in, and we’re going to save it.

But here’s what’s going to happen:

After I’m called by 30 friends of mine who contributed to different campaigns,
after I’m called by all of the special interests and by the — the donors and by
the lobbyists — and they have zero chance at convincing me, zero — I’ll get a
call the next day from the head of Ford. He’ll say. “Please reconsider,” I’ll
say no.

He’ll say, “Mr. President, we’ve decided to move the plant back to the United
States, and we’re not going to build it in Mexico.” That’s it. They have no
choice. They have no choice.

There are hundreds of things like that. I’ll give you another example.
Saudi Arabia, they make $1 billion a day. $1 billion a day. I love the Saudis.
Many are in this building. They make a billion dollars a day. Whenever they
have problems, we send over the ships. We say “we’re gonna protect.” What are
we doing? They’ve got nothing but money.

If the right person asked them, they’d pay a fortune. They wouldn’t be there
except for us.

And believe me, you look at the border with Yemen. You remember Obama a year
ago, Yemen was a great victory. Two weeks later, the place was blown up.
Everybody got out — and they kept our equipment.

They always keep our equipment. We ought to send used equipment, right? They
always keep our equipment. We ought to send some real junk, because, frankly,
it would be — we ought to send our surplus. We’re always losing this gorgeous
brand-new stuff.

But look at that border with Saudi Arabia. Do you really think that these
people are interested in Yemen? Saudi Arabia without us is gone. They;re gone.

And I’m the one that made all of the right predictions about Iraq. You know,
all of these politicians that I’m running against now — it’s so nice to say I’m
running as opposed to if I run, if I run. I’m running.

But all of these politicians that I’m running against now, they’re trying to
disassociate. I mean, you looked at Bush, it took him five days to answer the
question on Iraq. He couldn’t answer the question. He didn’t know. I said, “Is
he intelligent?”

Then I looked at Rubio. He was unable to answer the question, is Iraq a good
thing or bad thing? He didn’t know. He couldn’t answer the question.

How are these people gonna lead us? How are we gonna — how are we gonna go back
and make it great again? We can’t. They don’t have a clue. They can’t lead us.
They can’t. They can’t even answer simple questions. It was terrible.

But Saudi Arabia is in big, big trouble. Now, thanks to fracking and other
things, the oil is all over the place. And I used to say it, there are ships at
sea, and this was during the worst crisis, that were loaded up with oil, and
the cartel kept the price up, because, again, they were smarter than our
leaders. They were smarter than our leaders.

There is so much wealth out there that can make our country so rich again, and
therefore make it great again. Because we need money. We’re dying. We’re dying.
We need money. We have to do it. And we need the right people.

So Ford will come back. They’ll all come back. And I will say this, this is
going to be an election, in my opinion, that’s based on competence.

That’s true. But actually I am. I think I am a nice person. People that know
me, like me. Does my family like me? I think so, right. Look at my family. I’m
proud of my family.

By the way, speaking of my family, Melania, Barron, Kai, Donnie, Don, Vanessa,
Tiffany, Evanka did a great job. Did she do a great job?

Great. Jared, Laura and Eric, I’m very proud of my family. They’re a great
family.

So the reporter said to me the other day, “But, Mr. Trump, you’re not a nice
person. How can you get people to vote for you?”

I said, “I don’t know.” I said, “I think that number one, I am a nice person. I
give a lot of money away to charities and other things. I think I’m actually a
very nice person.”

But, I said, “This is going to be an election that’s based on competence,
because people are tired of these nice people. And they’re tired of being
ripped off by everybody in the world. And they’re tired of spending more money
on education than any nation in the world per capita, than any nation in the
world, and we are 26th in the world, 25 countries are better than us in
education. And some of them are like third world countries. But we’re becoming
a third word country, because of our infrastructure, our airports, our roads,
everything. So one of the things I did, and I said, you know what I’ll do. I’ll
do it. Because a lot of people said, “He’ll never run. Number one, he won’t
want to give up his lifestyle.”

They’re right about that, but I’m doing it.

Number two, I’m a private company, so nobody knows what I’m worth. And the one
thing is that when you run, you have to announce and certify to all sorts of
governmental authorities your net worth.

So I said, “That’s OK.” I’m proud of my net worth. I’ve done an amazing job.

I started off — thank you — I started off in a small office with my father in
Brooklyn and Queens, and my father said — and I love my father. I learned so
much. He was a great negotiator. I learned so much just sitting at his feet
playing with blocks listening to him negotiate with subcontractors. But I
learned a lot.

But he used to say, “Donald, don’t go into Manhattan. That’s the big leagues.
We don’t know anything about that. Don’t do it.”

I said, “I gotta go into Manhattan. I gotta build those big buildings. I gotta
do it, Dad. I’ve gotta do it.”

And after four or five years in Brooklyn, I ventured into Manhattan and did a
lot of great deals — the Grand Hyatt Hotel. I was responsible for the
convention center on the west side. I did a lot of great deals, and I did them
early and young. And now I’m building all over the world, and I love what I’m
doing.

But they all said, a lot of the pundits on television, “Well, Donald will never
run, and one of the main reasons is he’s private and he’s probably not as
successful as everybody thinks.”

So I said to myself, you know, nobody’s ever going to know unless I run,
because I’m really proud of my success. I really am.

I’ve employed — I’ve employed tens of thousands of people over my lifetime.
That means medical. That means education. That means everything.

So a large accounting firm and my accountants have been working for months,
because it’s big and complex, and they’ve put together a statement, a financial
statement, just a summary. But everything will be filed eventually with the
government, and we don’t extensions or anything. We’ll be filing it right on
time. We don’t need anything.

And it was even reported incorrectly yesterday, because they said, “He had
assets of $9 billion.” So I said (ph), “No, that’s the wrong number. That’s the
wrong number. Not assets.”

So they put together this. And before I say it, I have to say this. I made it
the old-fashioned way. It’s real estate. You know, it’s real estate.

It’s labor, and it’s unions good and some bad and lots of people that aren’t in
unions, and it’s all over the place and building all over the world.

And I have assets — big accounting firm, one of the most highly respected — 9
billion 240 million dollars.

And I have liabilities of about $500 million (ph). That’s long-term debt, very
low interest rates.

In fact, one of the big banks came to me and said, “Donald, you don’t have
enough borrowings. Could we loan you $4 billion”? I said, “I don’t need it. I
don’t want it. And I’ve been there. I don’t want it.”

But in two seconds, they give me whatever I wanted. So I have a total net
worth, and now with the increase, it’ll be well-over $10 billion. But here, a
total net worth of — net worth, not assets, not — a net worth, after all debt,
after all expenses, the greatest assets — Trump Tower, 1290 Avenue of the
Americas, Bank of America building in San Francisco, 40 Wall Street, sometimes
referred to as the Trump building right opposite the New York — many other
places all over the world.

So the total is $8,737,540,00.

Now I’m not doing that…

I’m not doing that to brag, because you know what? I don’t have to brag. I
don’t have to, believe it or not.

I’m doing that to say that that’s the kind of thinking our country needs. We
need that thinking. We have the opposite thinking.

We have losers. We have losers. We have people that don’t have it. We have
people that are morally corrupt. We have people that are selling this country
down the drain.

So I put together this statement, and the only reason I’m telling you about it
today is because we really do have to get going, because if we have another
three or four years — you know, we’re at $8 trillion now. We’re soon going to
be at $20 trillion.

According to the economists — who I’m not big believers in, but, nevertheless,
this is what they’re saying — that $24 trillion — we’re very close — that’s the
point of no return. $24 trillion. We will be there soon. That’s when we become
Greece. That’s when we become a country that’s unsalvageable. And we’re gonna
be there very soon. We’re gonna be there very soon.

So, just to sum up, I would do various things very quickly. I would repeal and
replace the big lie, Obamacare.

I would build a great wall, and nobody builds walls better than me, believe me,
and I’ll build them very inexpensively, I will build a great, great wall on our
southern border. And I will have Mexico pay for that wall.

Nobody would be tougher on ISIS than Donald Trump. Nobody.

I will find — within our military, I will find the General Patton or I will
find General MacArthur, I will find the right guy. I will find the guy that’s
going to take that military and make it really work. Nobody, nobody will be
pushing us around.

I will stop Iran from getting nuclear weapons. And we won’t be using a man like
Secretary Kerry that has absolutely no concept of negotiation, who’s making a
horrible and laughable deal, who’s just being tapped along as they make weapons
right now, and then goes into a bicycle race at 72 years old, and falls and
breaks his leg. I won’t be doing that. And I promise I will never be in a
bicycle race. That I can tell you.

I will immediately terminate President Obama’s illegal executive order on
immigration, immediately.

Fully support and back up the Second Amendment.

Now, it’s very interesting. Today I heard it. Through stupidity, in a very,
very hard core prison, interestingly named Clinton, two vicious murderers, two
vicious people escaped, and nobody knows where they are. And a woman was on
television this morning, and she said, “You know, Mr. Trump,” and she was
telling other people, and I actually called her, and she said, “You know, Mr.
Trump, I always was against guns. I didn’t want guns. And now since this
happened” — it’s up in the prison area — “my husband and I are finally in
agreement, because he wanted the guns. We now have a gun on every table. We’re
ready to start shooting.”

I said, “Very interesting.”

So protect the Second Amendment.

End — end Common Core. Common Core should — it is a disaster. Bush is totally
in favor of Common Core. I don’t see how he can possibly get the nomination.
He’s weak on immigration. He’s in favor of Common Core. How the hell can you
vote for this guy? You just can’t do it. We have to end — education has to be
local.

Rebuild the country’s infrastructure.

Nobody can do that like me. Believe me. It will be done on time, on budget, way
below cost, way below what anyone ever thought.

I look at the roads being built all over the country, and I say I can build
those things for one-third. What they do is unbelievable, how bad.

You know, we’re building on Pennsylvania Avenue, the Old Post Office, we’re
converting it into one of the world’s great hotels. It’s gonna be the best
hotel in Washington, D.C. We got it from the General Services Administration in
Washington. The Obama administration. We got it. It was the most highly sought
after — or one of them, but I think the most highly sought after project in the
history of General Services. We got it. People were shocked, Trump got it.

Well, I got it for two reasons. Number one, we’re really good. Number two, we
had a really good plan. And I’ll add in the third, we had a great financial
statement. Because the General Services, who are terrific people, by the way,
and talented people, they wanted to do a great job. And they wanted to make
sure it got built.

So we have to rebuild our infrastructure, our bridges, our roadways, our
airports. You come into La Guardia Airport, it’s like we’re in a third world
country. You look at the patches and the 40-year-old floor. They throw down
asphalt, and they throw.

You look at these airports, we are like a third world country. And I come in
from China and I come in from Qatar and I come in from different places, and
they have the most incredible airports in the world. You come to back to this
country and you have LAX, disaster. You have all of these disastrous airports.
We have to rebuild our infrastructure.

Save Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security without cuts. Have to do it.

Get rid of the fraud. Get rid of the waste and abuse, but save it. People have
been paying it for years. And now many of these candidates want to cut it. You
save it by making the United States, by making us rich again, by taking back
all of the money that’s being lost.

Renegotiate our foreign trade deals.

Reduce our $18 trillion in debt, because, believe me, we’re in a bubble. We
have artificially low interest rates. We have a stock market that, frankly, has
been good to me, but I still hate to see what’s happening. We have a stock
market that is so bloated.

Be careful of a bubble because what you’ve seen in the past might be small
potatoes compared to what happens. So be very, very careful.

And strengthen our military and take care of our vets. So, so important.

But if I get elected president I will bring it back bigger and better and
stronger than ever before, and we will make America great again.

This was going to be a speech on Hillary Clinton and all of the bad things and
we all know what’s going on, and especially how poor she’d do as president in
these very, very troubled times of radical Islamic terrorism.

Even her former Secret Service agent, who’s seen her under pressure and in
times of stress, has stated that she lacks the temperament and integrity to be
our president. There will be plenty of opportunity to discuss these important
issues at a later time, and I will deliver that speech very, very soon.

But today, there’s only one thing to discuss, the growing threat of terrorism
inside of our borders. The attack on the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, Florida,
was the worst terror strike on our soil since September 11th, and the worst
mass shooting in our country’s history.

So many people — it’s just hard to believe, but just so many people dead, so
many people gravely injured, so much carnage, such a disgrace. The horror is
beyond description. The families of these wonderful people are totally
devastated, and they will be forever. Likewise, our whole nation and indeed the
whole world is devastated.

We express our deepest sympathies to the victims, the wounded, and their
families. We mourn as one people for our nation’s loss, and pledge our support
to any and all who need it. I would like to ask now that we all observe a
moment of silence for the victims of this attack.

Thank you. Our nation stands together in solidarity with the members of
Orlando’s LGBT community. They have been through something that nobody could
ever experience. This is a very dark moment in America’s history. A radical
Islamic terrorist targeted the nightclub, not only because he wanted to kill
Americans, but in order to execute gay and lesbian citizens, because of their
sexual orientation.

It’s a strike at the heart and soul of who we are as a nation. It’s an assault
on the ability of free people to live their lives, love who they want, and
express their identity. It’s an attack on the right of every single American to
live in peace and safety in their own country.

We need to respond to this attack on America as one united people, with force,
purpose, and determination. But the current politically correct response
cripples our ability to talk and to think and act clearly. We’re not acting
clearly, we’re not talking clearly, we’ve got problems.

If we don’t get tough, and if we don’t get smart, and fast, we’re not going to
have our country anymore. There will be nothing, absolutely nothing, left. The
killer, whose name I will not use, or ever say, was born in Afghan, of Afghan
parents, who immigrated to the United States.

His father published support for the Afghan Taliban, a regime which murders
those who don’t share its radical views, and they murdered plenty. The father
even said he was running for president of Afghanistan. The bottom line is that
the only reason the killer was in America in the first place, was because we
allowed his family to come here.

That is a fact, and it’s a fact we need to talk about. We have a dysfunctional
immigration system, which does not permit us to know who we let into our
country, and it does not permit us to protect our citizens properly. We have an
incompetent administration.

And if I’m elected president, that will not change, I will tell you, that will
not change over the next four years. We have an administration that will not
change. But if I get in there, it’s going to change, and it’s going to change
quickly. We’re going from totally incompetent to just the opposite, believe me.

With 50 people dead and perhaps more ultimately and dozens more wounded, we
cannot afford to talk around issues anymore. We have to address these issues
head-on. I called for a ban after San Bernardino and was met with great scorn
and anger but now many years and I have to say many years but many are saying
that I was right to do so. And although the pause is temporary we must find out
what is going on. We have to do it.

It will be lifted — this ban — when and as a nation we’re in a position to
properly and perfectly screen these people coming into our country. They’re
pouring in and we don’t know what we’re doing. The immigration laws of the
United States give the president powers to suspend entry into the country of
any class of persons. Now, any class — it really is determined and to be
determined by the president for the interests of the United States. And it’s as
he or she deems appropriate. Hopefully it’s he in this case.

Thank you. I will use this power to protect the American people. When I’m
elected I will suspend immigration from areas of the world where there’s a
proven history of terrorism against the United States, Europe or our allies
until we fully understand how to end these threats.

And by the way we have no choice. After a full and partial and long — really
long overdue security assessment we will develop a responsible immigration
policy that serves the interests and values of America.

We cannot continue to allow thousands upon thousands of people to pour into our
country many of whom have the same thought process as this savage killer. Many
of the principles of radical Islam are incompatible with Western values and
institutions.

Remember this, radical Islam is anti-woman, anti-gay and anti- American.

I refuse to allow America to become a place where gay people, Christian people,
Jewish people are targets of persecution and intimation by radical Islamic
preachers of hate and violence.

This is not just a national security issue. It’s a quality of life issue. If we
want to protect the quality of life for all Americans — women and children, gay
and straight, Jews and Christians and all people then we need to tell the truth
about radical Islam and we need to do it now.

We need to tell the truth also about how radical Islam is coming to our shores.

With these people, folks, it’s coming. We’re importing radical Islamic
terrorism into the West through a failed immigration system and through an
intelligence community held back by our president. Even our own FBI director
has admitted that we cannot effectively check the backgrounds of people we’re
letting into America. All of the September 11th hijackists were issued visas.
Large numbers of Somali refugees in Minnesota have tried to join ISIS.

The Boston bombers came here through political asylum. The male shooter in San
Bernardino again whose name I will not mention was the child of immigrants from
Pakistan and he brought his wife, the other terrorist from Saudi Arabia through
another one of our easily exploited visa programs.

Immigration from Afghanistan into the United States has increased nearly five
fold — five fold in just one year. According to Pew Research, 99 percent of the
people in Afghanistan support oppressive sharia law. We admit many more, and
that’s just the way it is. We admit many more from other countries in the
region.

And I’ll tell you what: They share these oppressive views and values. We want
to remain a free and open society. Then, and if we do, then we have to control
our borders. We have to control, and we have to control them now, not later.
Right now.

Yet Hillary Clinton, for months, and despite so many attacks, repeatedly
refused to even say the words radical Islam until I challenged her yesterday.
And, guess what, she will probably say them. She sort of has said them, but
let’s see what happens. She really has no choice, but she doesn’t want to.

However, she’s really been forced, and she has been forced to say these words.
She supports, and the reason is, she supports so much of what is wrong, and
what is wrong with this country, and what’s going wrong with our country and
our borders. She has no clue, in my opinion, what radical Islam is and she
won’t speak honestly about it if she does, in fact, know. She’s in total
denial, and her continuing reluctance to ever name the enemy broadcasts
weakness across the entire world — true weakness.

I don’t know if you know this, but just a few weeks before San Bernardino, the
slaughter, that’s all it was was a slaughter, Hillary Clinton explained her
refusal to say the words “radical Islam.” Here is what she said, exact quote,
“Muslims are peaceful and tolerant people, and have nothing whatsoever to do
with terrorism.” That is Hillary Clinton.

So, she says the solution is to ban guns. They tried that in France which has
among the toughest gun laws anywhere in the world, and 130 people were brutally
murdered by Islamic terrorists in cold blood. Her plan is to disarm law abiding
Americans, abolishing the Second Amendment, and leaving only the bad guys and
terrorists with guns. No good. Not going to happen, folks. Not going to happen.
Not going to happen.

She wants to take away American’s guns and then admit the very people who want
to slaughter us. Let them come into the country, we don’t have guns. Let them
come in, let them have all the fun they want.

I will be meeting with the NRA, which has given me their earliest endorsement
in a presidential race, to discuss how to ensure Americans have the means to
protect themselves in this age of terror. I will be always defending the Second
Amendment.

The bottom line is that Hillary supports policies that bring the threat of
radical Islam into American and allow it to grow oversees, and it is growing.
In fact, Hillary Clinton’s catastrophic immigration plan will bring vastly more
radical Islamic immigration into this country, threatening not only our society
but our entire way of life. When it comes to radical Islamic terrorism,
ignorance is not bliss. It’s deadly — totally deadly.

The Obama administration, with the support of Hillary Clinton and others, has
also damaged our security by restraining our intelligence gathering and we
have, just, no intelligence gathering information. We need this information so
badly, and he stopped it. We don’t have the support. We don’t have the support
of the law enforcement system because Obama is not letting them do their job.
They are not being allowed to do their job. And, they can do it well — better
than anybody.

We need a new leader. We need a new leader fast.

They have put political correctness above common sense, above your safety, and
above all else. I refuse to be politically correct.

I want to do the right thing. I want to straighten things out and I want to
make America great again.

The days of deadly ignorance will end, and they will end soon if I’m elected.
As president I will give our intelligence community, law enforcement and
military the tools they need to prevent terrorist attacks. They don’t have
those tools now.

We need an intelligence gathering system second to none. Second to none. That
includes better cooperation between state, local and federal officials, and
with our allies, very importantly. I will have an Attorney General, a Director
of National Intelligence and a Secretary of Defense who’ll know how to fight a
war on radical Islamic terrorism.

And they will have the support that they need to get the job done right, not
like it is right now. It’s not right.

We also must ensure the American people are provided the information they need
to understand the threat. The Senate subcommittee on Immigration has already
identified hundreds of immigrants charged with terrorist activities inside the
United States since September 11th. Nearly a year ago, the Senate Subcommittee
asked President Obama’s Department of Justice, State and Homeland Security to
provide the immigration history of all terrorists inside the United States.
These Departments refused to comply. Nobody even knows why. They refused to
comply.

President Obama must release the full and complete immigration histories of all
individuals implicated in terrorist activities of any kind since September
11th. So important. The public has a right to know how these people got here,
how they came on to this great land, why are they here?

We have to screen applicants to know whether they are affiliated with or
supporting radical groups and beliefs, very simple. We have to control the
amount of future immigration into this country and we have to prevent large
pockets of radicalization from forming inside America. Not complicated.

Every – and just think of this. Take a look. Every single event, even a single
individual can be devastating, and all you have to do is take a look at what
happened in Orlando and what happened in other cases. Just a single event. And
just one person. Can you imagine what they’ll do in large groups, which we’re
allowing now to come here.

Truly our President doesn’t know what he’s doing. He’s failed us and he’s
failed us badly. Under his leadership this situation will not get any better,
it will only get worse. And I’ve been saying that for a long time. Each year
the United States permanently admits 100,000 immigrants from the Middle East
and many more from Muslim countries outside of the Middle East. Our government
has been admitting ever- growing numbers, year after year, without any
effective plan for our own security.

In fact, Clinton’s State Department was in charge of admissions and the
admissions process for people applying to enter from overseas. Having learned
nothing from these attacks, she now plans to massively increase admissions
without a screening plan including a 500 percent increase in Syrian refugees
coming into our country. Tell me, tell me – how stupid is that?

This could be a better, bigger, more horrible version than the legendary Trojan
Horse ever was. Altogether, under the Clinton plan, you’d be admitting hundreds
of thousands of refugees from the Middle East with no system to vet them, or to
prevent the radicalization of the children and their children. Not only their
children, by the way, they’re trying to take over our children and convince
them how wonderful ISIS is and how wonderful Islam is and we don’t know what’s
happening.

The burden is on Hillary Clinton to tell us why she believes immigration from
these dangerous countries should be increased without any effective system to
really to screen. We’re not screening people.

So why don’t we have an effective screening system? We don’t. We’re being
laughed at all over the world. The burden is on Hillary Clinton to tell us why
we should admit anyone into our country who supports violence of any kind
against gay and lesbian Americans. The burden is on Hillary Clinton to tell us
how she will pay for it, her plan will cost hundreds of billions of dollars
long term.

Wouldn’t this be money better spent rebuilding America for our current
population including the many poor people already living here.

We have poverty all over and this is how we’re spending billions of dollars. We
have to stop the tremendous flow of Syrian refugees into the United States. We
don’t know who they are, they have no documentation and we don’t know what
they’re planning and we won’t unless we have proper supervisor and proper
leadership in which case they’re out of here.

What I want is common sense. I want a mainstream immigration policy that
promotes American values. That’s a choice I put before the American people. A
mainstream immigration policy designed to benefit America or Hillary Clinton’s
radical immigration policy designed to benefit politically correct special
interests. That’s all it is. We’ve got to get smart and tough and vigilant and
we’ve got to do it now because later is too late — going to be too late for our
country.

The media talks about home grown terrorism but Islamic radicalism and that’s a
very, very important term — a term that the president refuses to use and the
networks that nurture it are imports from overseas whether you like it or
whether you don’t like it. Yes, there are many radicalized people already
inside our country as a result of poor policies of the past.

But the whole point is that we will be much, much and it will be easier to deal
with our current problem if we don’t keep on bringing people who add to the
problem. And that’s what they’re doing. We’re letting all of these people —
hundreds of thousands of people come in and all they’re doing is adding to this
incredible problem we have.

For instance, the controversial mosque attended by the Boston bombers had at
its founder and as its founder an immigrant from overseas charged in an
assassination plot. This shooter and amazingly in Orlando was the child of an
immigrant father who supported one of the most repressive regimes on earth. Why
would we admit people who support violent hatred?

Hillary Clinton can never claim to be a friend of the gay community as long as
she continues to support immigration policies that bring Islamic extremists to
our country and who suppress women, gays and anyone who doesn’t share their
views or values.

She can’t have it both ways. She can’t claim to be supportive of these
communities while trying to increase the number of people coming in who want to
oppress these same communities. How does this kind of immigration make our
lives better? How does this kind of immigration make our country better? Why
does Hillary Clinton want to bring people in in vast numbers who reject our
values? Why? Explain.

Ask yourself who is really the friend of women and the LGBT community, Donald
Trump with actions or Hillary Clinton with her words?

I will tell you who the better friend is and some day I believe that will be
proven out bigly

And by the way the LGBT community is just — what’s happened to them is just so
sad and to be thinking about where their policies are currently with this
administration is a disgrace to that community, I will tell you right now.

Clinton wants to allow radical Islamic terrorists to pour into our country.
They enslave women, and they murder gays. I don’t want them in our country.

Immigration is a privilege, and we should not let anyone into this country who
doesn’t support our communities. All of our communities, every single one of
them. Americans already admitted four times more immigrants than any country on
Earth, anybody in the world. Four times more. At least, because we don’t even
know who’s coming in. And we continue to admit millions more with no real
checks or scrutiny.

Not surprisingly, wages for our workers haven’t budged. In almost 20 years. You
wonder why we get the crowds, you wonder why we get this tremendous support,
you wonder why I’ve gotten more votes than any Republican in any primary in the
history of the Republican Party? Take a look at that. Take a look at your
security, take a look at the wages. For 18 years they’ve been stagnant, they’ve
even gone down.

So whether it’s a matter of national security, or financial security, we can’t
afford to keep on going like this. Cannot afford it. We owe $19 trillion in
debt. And no longer have any options. Our communities from all backgrounds are
ready for some relief. This is not an act of offense against anyone. It’s
really an act of defense. I want us all, all of us, to work together. We have
to form a partnership, with our Muslim communities. We have Muslim communities
in this country that are great, and we have to form that partnership.

Now, the Muslim community, so important. They have to work with us. They have
to cooperate with law enforcement and turn in the people who they know are bad.
They know it. And they have to do it, and they have to do it forthwith. I want
to fix our schools. I want to fix our bridges. And our jobs market, we’re going
to have it rocket again, we’re going to make great trade deals. But I want
every American to succeed including Muslims.

But the Muslims have to work with us. They have to work with us. They know
what’s going on. They know that he was bad. They knew the people in San
Bernardino were bad. But you know what? They didn’t turn them in. And you know
what? We had death, and destruction.

Hillary Clinton wants to empty out the Treasury to bring people into the
country that include individuals who preach hate against our citizens. I want
to protect our citizens, all of our citizens. The terrorist attack on Pulse
nightclub demands a full and complete investigation into every single aspect of
the assault. In San Bernardino, as an example, people who knew what was going
on, they knew exactly, but they used the excuse of racial profiling for not
reporting it. They said oh, “We thought so but we didn’t want to use racial
profiling.” Which was probably an excuse given to them by their lawyer, so they
don’t get in trouble.

We need to know what the killer discussed with his relatives, parents, friends
and associates. We need to know if he was affiliated with any radical mosques
or radical activists and what, if any, is their immigration status. We have to
know, and we have to know fast. We need to know if he traveled anywhere and who
he traveled with. We need to know, and we need to make sure, every single last
person involved in this plan, including anyone who knew something but didn’t
tell us, is brought to justice, so when people know what’s going on and they
don’t tell us, and we have an attack, and people die, these people have to have
consequences. Big consequences.

America must do more — much more — to protect its citizens, especially people
who are potential victims of crimes based on their backgrounds or sexual
orientation, as you just saw in Orlando.

 It also means we must change our foreign policy. The decision to
overthrow the regime in Libya, then pushing for the overthrow of the regime in
Syria, among other things, without plans for the day after, have created space
for ISIS to expand and grow like nobody has ever seen before.

These actions, along with our disastrous Iran deal, have also reduced our
ability to work in partnership with our Muslim allies in the region. That is
why our new goal must be to defeat Islamic terrorism not nation building. No
more nation building. It’s never going to work.

And by the way we’ve spent almost $5 trillion over the years on trying to
nation build in the Middle East and it has been complete and total disaster.
We’re further away now than we were 15 years ago. For instance, the last major
NATO mission was Hillary Clinton’s war in Libya. That mission helped to unleash
ISIS on a new continent.

I’ve said NATO need to change its focus and stop terrorism. We have to focus on
terrorism and we have to stop terrorism. Since I’ve raised that criticism and
it’s OK. I’ve gotten no credit for it but these are minor details — NATO has
since announced a new initiative — front page of the Wall Street Journal four
days ago focused on just that. America must unite the whole civilized world in
the fight against Islamic terrorism.

Pretty much like we did with communism during the Cold War. We tried it
President Obama’s way, doesn’t work. He gave the world his apology tour. We got
ISIS and many other problems in return. That’s what we got. Remember the famous
apology tour. We’re sorry for everything.

I’d like to conclude my remarks today by again expressing our solitarily with
the people of Orlando who have come under this horrific attack. When I’m
president I pledge to protect and defend all Americans who live inside our
borders. Wherever they come from, wherever they were born, I don’t care. All
Americans living here and following our laws not other laws will be protected.

Thank you. Thank you. We’re going to be tough and we’re going to be smart and
we’re going to do it right. America will be a tolerant and open society.
America will also be a safe society. We will protect our borders at home. We
will defeat ISIS overseas. We have no choice. We will ensure every parent can
raise their children in peace and safety. We will make America rich again. We
will make America safe again. We will make America great again

Over the next 80 days, we are going to work very hard together, and we are going to win this state – and we are going to win the White House.

It is going to be a new day in America.

Government will listen to the people again.

The voters, not the special interests, will be in charge.

Our economy will grow.

Jobs will come pouring in.

New factories are going to stretch across this nation.

Families are going to be safe and secure. Crime will go down, and law and order will be restored.

Immigration laws will be enforced, and trade deals will protect American workers.

We are going to reject globalism and put America First. It’s going to be America First from now on.

This is the change I am promising. My opponent is the corrupt defender of a rigged system and a failed status quo.

She is an insider fighting for insiders.

I am an outsider fighting for you.

Hillary Clinton is a throwback from Yesterday.

Our campaign is about creating a New American Future.

I am not a politician. I have no special interest. My only interest is you, the American people.

I am running to represent the great majority of Americans – Republicans, Democrats, Independents, Liberals and Conservatives – who turn on the TV every night and don’t see anyone speaking up for them.

This campaign is about giving a voice to those who don’t have one.

I understand the great responsibility you have placed with me, and I will never let you down.

Once more, it will be a government of, by and for the people.

Let’s talk about what my reform agenda will mean for the citizens of Virginia.

First, let’s talk about our amazing Veterans.

The Commonwealth of Virginia is home to about 800,000 Veterans who have served this country.

To all Veterans here tonight, and across this nation I say: Thank You. We will never let you down.

The Obama-Clinton Administration has betrayed our Veterans, and it’s betrayed them badly.

Veterans are dying waiting for the care they need.

That ends – and it ends fast – under a Trump Administration.

I have a detailed ten-point plan on Veterans reform, available on my website.

At the center of the plan is Veterans’ choice. The VA will remain a public system because it is a public trust. But Veterans will have the right to either seek care at a VA facility, or to go to a private doctor or medical clinic. Never again will we allow a Veteran to die waiting for the care they need.

A Trump Administration will also rebuild our depleted military.

The best way to keep our troops out of harm’s way, and to keep our nation out of preventable conflicts, is to remember those famous words: Peace Through Strength.

Unfortunately, our active duty armed forces have shrunk from 2 million in 1991 to about 1.3 million today.

The Navy has shrunk from over 500 ships to 272 ships during this same period of time.

The Air Force is about one-third smaller than 1991.

President Obama has proposed a 2017 defense budget that in real dollars, cuts nearly 25 percent from what we were spending in 2011.

We face threats as never before, but the Obama-Clinton Administration is determined to keep shrinking our military. That’s probably because President Obama has said he thinks the greatest threat we face is Global Warming.

Remember, President Obama and Hillary Clinton can’t even say the words: Radical Islamic Terrorism.

Now, while President Obama and Hillary Clinton are shrinking America’s military, they are expanding the military of Iran. They are doing this with their disastrous deal that puts Iran on the path to nuclear weapons, and gives them another $150 billion dollars – not to mention the $400 million dollars in cash ransom payments.

Let’s also not forget that Hillary Clinton’s disastrous Middle East policies unleashed ISIS onto the world – a fact for which Hillary Clinton has expressed zero remorse. She will never be able to fix the ISIS problem that her policies created.

Yet, as our military was depleted on Hillary Clinton’s watch, things turned out really well for her. The Clintons made $60 million dollars in gross income while she was Secretary of State, plus countless more to the Clinton Foundation.

It’s called pay-for-play.

She even created an illegal private email server – one easily hacked by our foreign enemies – to hide her corrupt dealings. Then, she deleted 33,000 emails to try and cover her tracks. She lied about it all, even to Congress.

A Trump Administration will end the government corruption. No one will be above the law.

Let’s talk about another major issue here in Virginia: Energy.

I visited the hardworking miners in this state. They are tremendous people who only want to be able to do their jobs, provide for their families and power this country.

We are going to put our great miners and steel workers back to work.

But Hillary Clinton wants to put them out of a job.

Let’s repeat her infamous words. Clinton vowed that she would “put a lot of coal miners and coal companies out of business.”

According to the Energy Information Administration, the U.S. has the largest recoverable coal reserves in the world. These reserves are located in Virginia, West Virginia, Kentucky, Pennsylvania, and Illinois – to name a few examples.

Over 90 percent of U.S. coal is used for electricity.

In other words, my plan will make your energy bill cheaper.

Hillary Clinton’s anti-energy agenda is a massive tax on the poor.

In January of 2016, the Obama Administration announced a moratorium on new coal leases on federal lands. This comes on the heels of many other anti-coal regulations from the Obama Administration. Virginia, the largest exporter of coal in the United States, will be crushed by these Obama-Clinton policies.

Absolutely crushed.

Thanks to the Obama-Clinton agenda, coal exports from the Port of Virginia – the largest port for coal exportation in the U.S. – have declined significantly the last 3 years. Virginia has seen a stunning 70 percent decline in coal jobs since 1990.

Hillary Clinton will finish the mining industry off for good.

We won’t let that happen.

According to the Heritage Foundation, by 2030, the Obama-Clinton energy restrictions will eliminate another half a million manufacturing jobs, reduce economic output by $2.5 trillion dollars, and reduce incomes by $7,000 dollars per person.

A Trump Administration will end the Obama-Clinton war on the American worker.

We will unleash an energy revolution the likes of which we have never seen before.

According to the Institute for Energy Research, lifting the restrictions on all sources of American energy will:

--Increase GDP by more than $100 billion dollars annually

--Add over 500,000 new jobs annually

--Increase annual wages by more than $30 billion dollars over the next 7 years

--Increase federal, state, and local tax revenues by almost $6 trillion dollars over 4 decades

--Increase total economic activity by more than $20 trillion dollars over the next 40 years.

Doesn’t that sound good to you?

Hillary Clinton will Make America Poor. I want to Make America Wealthy Again.

Another industry of huge importance to this state, and country, is agriculture.

Farmers are the backbone of America. Agriculture and forestry, combined, provide over 400,000 jobs right here in the Commonwealth.

But the massive regulations and EPA interventions from the Obama-Clinton Administration have devastated America’s farmers, agriculture and forestry workers.

Hillary Clinton supports every last job-killing Obama regulation, and wants to go even further. She wants to put the farmers out of business, just like she wants to put the miners and steel workers out of business.

In fact, Hillary Clinton’s $1.3 trillion dollar tax hike would raise taxes on family farms to as much as nearly fifty percent. She even wants to tax them again at death by as much as 45 percent. It’s a war on farmers.

A Trump Administration will be a pro-agriculture Administration.

I just announced the new members of my Agricultural Advisory Committee, and they include Virginia’s own Congressman Bob Goodlatte.

Together, we are going to work on reforms to support our family farms and boost agricultural production in America.

That begins with hiring a pro-farmer pro-American energy head of the EPA.

It also means I am going to eliminate the destructive and invasive Waters of the United States rule that was unilaterally issued by this Administration. This rule is so extreme it gives federal agencies control over creeks and small streams – even puddles – on private property.

I am also going to cut taxes for family farms – down to fifteen percent. On top of that, we are going to end the death tax on family farms, which has severely injured this family industry and the American tradition of family farming.

Then, by unleashing American energy – including coal – we are going to make it easier, cheaper and less expensive to produce, saving money for consumers as well. This will give America the competitive edge it needs.

Finally, on this subject, when we negotiate trade deals, we will make sure they are fair and balanced – no more one-sided trade deals where we open our markets but they close theirs. Not anymore.

Another issue I’d like to address briefly today is very important to everyone in this state and country: law and order.

I was honored to meet today with Stafford County Sheriff’s Deputy Brandon Boyle, who sustained five gunshot wounds this summer in the line of duty.

I want to take a moment today to thank all the men and women who serve this country as law enforcement officers. We thank you, and we stand with you.

I am proud to have the support of the Law Enforcement Community. By contrast, Hillary Clinton is banking on her friend Terry McAuliffe getting thousands of violent felons to the voting booths, in an effort to cancel out the votes of both the law enforcement community and crime victims.

At the same time, Hillary Clinton wants to essentially abolish the 2nd amendment for law-abiding Americans. She wants to overturn the Supreme Court ruling that affirmed the 2nd Amendment as a private right, so that any city or state in this country can ban private gun ownership.

We will save the 2nd amendment, and appoint judges who will protect your freedoms.

One more issue central to law and order is having a secure immigration system.

Failed Governor Tim Kaine – on whose watch Virginia’s unemployment rate more than doubled – allowed illegal immigration in Virginia to massively increase. By the way, less than a week into entering office, Tim Kaine proposed nearly $4 billion dollars in new taxes – including a tax increase on people earning as little as $17,000 a year.

Overall, the illegal immigrant population in Virginia has nearly tripled since 2000, putting enormous pressure on schools and public services. It’s getting worse now as thousands of recent border-crossers are being relocated to the state.

The people hurt most by our open border are low-income Hispanic and African-Americans who are competing for jobs and community resources against new lower-wage arrivals.

Our open border is also being used as a recruiting tool for criminal gangs, creating a growing gang problem right here in the state of Virginia where a large number of gang members are in the country illegally.

We are going to end this chaos and restore peace, law and order to our land.

Finally, today, I’d like to address an issue of great and deep personal importance to me.

In recent days, across this country, I’ve asked the African-American community to honor me with their vote. I fully recognize that outreach to the African-American community is an area where the Republican Party must do better.

The GOP is the Party of Lincoln, and I want our party to be the home of the African-American vote once again. I want an inclusive country, and I want an inclusive party.

We reject the bigotry of Hillary Clinton who sees people of color only as votes, not as human beings worthy of a better future.

We’ve seen what the Democratic policies have done in cities like Detroit, Baltimore and Chicago.

Now, Hillary Clinton wants to make things worse by raising taxes on 2.6 million African-American owned businesses in this country.

My goal is to provide every African-American child in this country with access to the ladder of American success: a good education, and a good-paying job.

This includes school choice. It means reforming regulations so young Americans can get the credit they need to start a small business. It means trade and immigration policies that put American workers at the front of the line.

Hillary Clinton’s amnesty plan will give jobs, benefits and Social Security to millions of people here illegally at taxpayer expense.

On top of that, according to the U.S. Senate Immigration Subcommittee, her plan would bring 620,000 refugees in her first term alone.

She would rather provide a job to a refugee living overseas than a young unemployed African-American youth in Virginia.

A Trump Administration will put American workers first.

Americanism, not globalism, will be our credo.

We will bring America together as one country again – united as Americans in common purpose and common dreams.

A thriving economy.

A strong border.

A powerful military.

A peaceful nation.

A rising standard of living.

This is what I promise you.

Let’s get out there and win on November 8th.

Together, We Will Make America Wealthy Again

We Will Make America Proud Again.

We Will Make America Safe Again.

And We Will Make America Great Again For Each And Every American.

Thank you, and God Bless You!

It’s so great to be here tonight. I am honored to also be joined this evening by Governor Scott Walker, Chairman Reince Priebus, and Mayor Rudy Giuliani.

We are at a decisive moment in this election.

Last week, I laid out my plan to bring jobs back to our country. Yesterday, I laid out my plan to defeat Radical Islamic Terrorism. Tonight, I am going to talk about how to make our communities safe again from crime and lawlessness.

Let me begin by thanking the law enforcement officers here in this city, and across this country, for their service and sacrifice in difficult times.

The violence, riots and destruction that have taken place in Milwaukee is an assault on the right of all citizens to live in security and peace.

Law and order must be restored. It must be restored for the sake of all, but most especially the sake of those living in the affected communities.

The main victims of these riots are law-abiding African-American citizens living in these neighborhoods. It is their jobs, their homes, their schools and communities which will suffer as a result.

There is no compassion in tolerating lawless conduct. Crime and violence is an attack on the poor, and will never be accepted in a Trump Administration.

The narrative that has been pushed aggressively for years now by our current Administration, and pushed by my opponent Hillary Clinton, is a false one. The problem in our poorest communities is not that there are too many police, the problem is that there are not enough police.

More law enforcement, more community engagement, more effective policing is what our country needs.

Just like Hillary Clinton is against the miners, she is against the police. You know it, and I know it.

Those peddling the narrative of cops as a racist force in our society – a narrative supported with a nod by my opponent – share directly in the responsibility for the unrest in Milwaukee, and many other places within our country.

They have fostered the dangerous anti-police atmosphere in America.

Everytime we rush to judgment with false facts and narratives – whether in Ferguson or in Baltimore – and foment further unrest, we do a direct disservice to poor African-American residents who are hurt by the high crime in their communities.

During the last 72 hours, while protestors have raged against the police here in Milwaukee, another 9 were killed in Chicago and another 46 were wounded. More than 2,600 people have been shot in Chicago since the beginning of the year, and almost 4,000 killed in President Obama’s hometown area since his presidency began.

How are we serving these American victims by attacking law enforcement officers?

The war on our police must end. It must end now.

The war on our police is a war on all peaceful citizens who want to be able to work and live and send their kids to school in safety.

Our job is not to make life more comfortable for the rioter, the looter, the violent disruptor. Our job is to make life more comfortable for the African-American parent who wants their kids to be able to safely walk the streets. Or the senior citizen waiting for a bus. Or the young child walking home from school.

For every one violent protestor, there are a hundred moms and dads and kids on that same city block who just want to be able to sleep safely at night. My opponent would rather protect the offender than the victim.

Hillary Clinton-backed policies are responsible for the problems in the inner cities today, and a vote for her is a vote for another generation of poverty, high crime, and lost opportunities.

I care too much about my country to let that happen.

We all care too much about our country to let that happen.

Good policing saves lives. My dear friend, Rudy Giuliani, knows a thing or two about this. The policies put into place by Rudy ultimately brought down crime by 76 percent and murder by 84 percent. Think of how many families were saved, how much heartache was prevented, when police were put into communities and criminals were removed.

Imagine how many lives could have been saved, all across this country, if Democratic politicians hadn’t blocked in their cities what Rudy did in New York City? I’ll make sure we deliver safe neighborhoods here in Milwaukee, and all across this country.

It’s easy for Hillary Clinton to turn a blind eye to crime when she has her own private security force. I believe all Americans, not just the powerful, are entitled to security.

Hillary Clinton has had her chance. She failed. Now it’s time for new leadership.

The Hillary Clinton agenda hurts poor people the most.

There is no compassion in allowing drug dealers, gang members, and felons to prey on innocent people. It is the first duty of government to keep the innocent safe, and when I am President I will fight for the safety of every American – and especially those Americans who have not known safety for a very, very long time.

I am asking for the vote of every African-American citizen struggling in our country today who wants a different future.

It is time for our society to address some honest and very difficult truths.

The Democratic Party has failed and betrayed the African-American community. Democratic crime policies, education policies, and economic policies have produced only more crime, more broken homes, and more poverty.

Let us look at the situation right here in Milwaukee, a city run by Democrats for decade after decade. Last year, killings in this city increased by 69 percent, plus another 634 victims of non-fatal shootings. 18-29-year-olds accounted for nearly half of the homicide victims. The poverty rate here is nearly double the national average. Almost 4 in 10 African-American men in Milwaukee between the ages of 25-54 do not have a job. Nearly four in 10 single mother households are living in poverty. 55 public schools in this city have been rated as failing to meet expectations, despite ten thousand dollars in funding per-pupil. There is only a 60% graduation rate, and it’s one of the worst public school systems in the country.

1 in 5 manufacturing jobs has disappeared in Milwaukee since we fully opened our markets to China, and many African-American neighborhoods have borne the brunt of this hit.

To every voter in Milwaukee, to every voter living in every inner city, or every forgotten stretch of our society, I am running to offer you a better future.

The Democratic Party has taken the votes of African-Americans for granted. They’ve just assumed they’ll get your support and done nothing in return for it. It’s time to give the Democrats some competition for these votes, and it’s time to rebuild the inner cities of America – and to reject the failed leadership of a rigged political system.

I’m not part of the corrupt system. In fact, the corrupt system is trying to stop me. I’ve been paying my own way. The voters in the Republican Party this year defied the donors, the consultants, the power brokers, and choose a nominee from outside our failed and corrupt and broken system.

The other party – the Democratic Party – nominated the personification of special interest corruption. The Democratic Party rigged the nomination to give it to Hillary Clinton, thus giving the soul of their party this year to the special interests.

I am running to listen to your voice, to hear your cries for help. The quiet voices in our society, not the loudest demonstrators, need to have their demands heard.

Jobs. Safety. Opportunity. Fair and equal representation.

We reject the bigotry of Hillary Clinton which panders to and talks down to communities of color and sees them only as votes, not as individual human beings worthy of a better future. She doesn’t care at all about the hurting people of this country, or the suffering she has caused them.

The African-American community has been taken for granted for decades by the Democratic Party. It’s time to break with the failures of the past – I want to offer Americans a new future.

It is time for rule by the people, not rule by special interests.

Every insider, getting rich off of our broken system, is throwing money at Hillary Clinton. The hedge fund managers, the Wall Street investors, the professional political class.

It’s the powerful protecting the powerful.

Insiders fighting for insiders.

I am fighting for you.

When we talk about the insider, who are we talking about? It’s the comfortable politicians looking out for their own interests. It’s the lobbyists who know how to insert that perfect loophole into every bill. It’s the financial industry that knows how to regulate their competition out of existence. The insiders also include the media executives, anchors and journalists in Washington, Los Angeles, and New York City, who are part of the same failed status quo and want nothing to change.

Every day you pick up a newspaper, or turn on the nightly news, and you hear about some self-interest banker or some discredited Washington insider says they oppose our campaign. Or some encrusted old politician says they oppose our campaign. Or some big time lobbyist says they oppose our campaign.

I wear their opposition as a badge of honor. Because it means I am fighting for REAL change, not just partisan change. I am fighting – all of us across the country are fighting – for peaceful regime change in our own country. The media-donor-political complex that’s bled this country dry has to be replaced with a new government of, by and for the people.

The leadership class in Washington D.C., of which Hillary Clinton has been a member for thirty years, has abandoned the people of this country.

I am going to give the people their voice back.

Think about it. The people opposing our campaign are the same people who have left our border open and let innocent people suffer as a result.

The people opposing our campaign are the same people who have led us into one disastrous foreign war after another.

The people opposing our campaign are the same people who lied to us about one trade deal after another.

Aren’t you tired of a system that gets rich at your expense?

Aren’t you tired of big media, big businesses, and big donors rigging the system to keep your voice from being heard?

Are you ready for change?

Are you ready for leadership that puts you, the American people, first? That puts your country first? That puts your family first?

Let’s talk about what this means for the inner cities of America. It’s time to break through the television noise, the entrenched interests. I understand that a lot of powerful people in our political system – a lot of people who’ve created our problems – will lose a lot of their contracts, and their special gigs, if African-American voters, and all minority voters, support my campaign.

It’s time to stop making the special interests rich. It’s time to make the American people rich.

I am going to Make America Wealthy Again.

The Democratic Party has run nearly every inner city in this country for 50 years, and run them into financial ruin.

They’ve ruined the schools.

They’ve driven out the jobs.

They’ve tolerated a level of crime no American should consider acceptable.

Violent crime has risen 17% in America’s 50 largest cities last year. Killings of police officers this year is up nearly 50 percent. Homicides are up more than 60% in Baltimore. They are up more than 50% in Washington, D.C.

This is the future offered by Hillary Clinton. More poverty, more crime, and more of the same. The future she offers is the most pessimistic thing I can possibly imagine.

It is time for a different future.

Here is what I am proposing.

First, on immigration. No community in this country has been hurt worse by Hillary Clinton’s immigration policies than the African-American community. Now she is proposing to print instant work permits for millions of illegal immigrants, taking jobs directly from low-income Americans. I will secure our border, protect our workers, and improve jobs and wages in your community. We will only invite people to join our country who share our tolerant values, who support our Constitution, and who love all of our people.

On trade, I am going to renegotiate NAFTA, stand up to China, withdraw from the TPP, and protect every last American job.

On taxes, I am going to give a massive tax cut to every worker and small business in this country, bring thousands of new companies and millions of new jobs onto our shores – and make it very difficult for our businesses to leave.

I am going to reform our regulations so jobs stay in America, and new businesses come to America to hire workers right here in Milwaukee. Every policy my opponent has sends jobs overseas. I am going to bring trillions in new wealth back to the United States.

On education, it is time to have school choice, merit pay for teachers, and to end the tenure policies that hurt good teachers and reward bad teachers. We are going to put students and parents first.

Hillary Clinton would rather deny opportunities to millions of young African-American children, just so she can curry favor with the education bureaucracy.

I am going to allow charter schools to thrive, and help young kids get on the American ladder of success: a good education, and a good-paying job.

On crime, I am going to support more police in our communities, appoint the best prosecutors and judges in the country, pursue strong enforcement of federal laws, and I am going to break up the gangs, the cartels and criminal syndicates terrorizing our neighborhoods. To every lawbreaker hurting innocent people in this country, I say: your free reign will soon come crashing to an end.

On healthcare, we are going to get rid of Obamacare – which has caused soaring double-digit premium increases – and give choice to patients and consumers. Aetna, just today, announced they are dropping out – as are many of the major insurance companies.

On government corruption, I am going to restore honor to our government. We’ve seen the corruption of Hillary Clinton, the mass email deletions, the pay-for-play at the State Department, the profiteering, the favors given to foreign corporations and governments at your expense. We’ve seen a former Secretary of State lie to Congress about her illegal email scheme, risk innocent American lives, and bring dishonor onto our government.

In my Administration, I am going to enforce all laws concerning the protection of classified information. No one will be above the law.

I am going to forbid senior officials from trading favors for cash by preventing them from collecting lavish speaking fees through their spouses when they serve.

I am going to ask my senior officials to sign an agreement not to accept speaking fees from corporations with a registered lobbyist for five years after leaving office, or from any entity tied to a foreign government. This is all just the beginning.

We are going to make this a government of the people once again. This is our chance to take back power from all the people who’ve taken it from you. The reason you see the establishment media lining up behind my opponent is because they are scared that you, with your vote, can take away their power and return it to your family and community.

These are tough times. But I know we can make American Greater Than Ever Before.

To do this, we are going to need a fighter in the White House.

I will be your fighter.

To defeat crime and Radical Islamic Terrorism in our country, to win trade in our country, you need tremendous physical and mental strength and stamina. Hillary Clinton doesn’t have that strength and stamina. She cannot win for you.

Most importantly, she has bad judgment. Bad judgment on terrorism, bad judgement on foreign policy, bad judgment on trade.

The only individuals she’s ever delivered for is her donors – not the people.

I’ve said it before, and I’ll say it again. My opponent asks her supporters to repeat a three-word pledge. Her pledge reads: “I’m With Her”

I choose to recite a different pledge. My pledge reads: “I’m With You – the American people.”

I will fight to ensure that every American is treated equally, protected equally, and honored equally. We will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its forms, and seek a new future of security, prosperity and opportunity – a future built on our common culture and values as one American people.

I am asking for your vote so I can be your champion in the White House. We will once again be a country of law and order, and a country of great success.

To every parent who dreams for their children, and to every child who dreams for their future, I say these words to you tonight: I’m with you, I will fight for you, and I will win for you.

Together, We Will Make America Strong Again.

We Will Make American Safe Again.

And We Will Make America Great Again.

Thank you, and God Bless.

Thank you, Phoenix. I am so glad to be back in Arizona. A state that has a very, very special place in my heart.

I love the people of Arizona and together we are going to win the white house in November. Now, you know, this is where it all began for me. Remember that massive crowd also. So I said, let's go and have some fun tonight, we're going to Arizona, okay? Thank you.

This will be a little bit different. This won't be a rally speech, per se. Instead, I'm going to deliver a detailed policy address on one of the greatest challenges facing our country today -- illegal immigration. I've just landed.

Having returned from a very important and special meeting with the president of Mexico, a man I like and respect very much, and a man who truly loves his country, Mexico. And by the way, just like I am a man who loves my country, the United States.

We agreed on the importance of ending the illegal flow of drugs, cash, guns, and people across our border. And to put the cartels out of business. We also discussed the great contributions of Mexican-American citizens of our two countries, my love for the people of Mexico, and the leadership and friendship that we have between Mexico and the United States.

It was a thoughtful and substantive conversation and it will go on for a while, and in the end, we're all gonna win, both countries. We're all gonna win. This is the first of what I expect will be many, many conversations and in a Trump administration, we're going to go about creating a new relationship between our two countries. But it's going to be a fair relationship. We want fairness.

But to fix our immigration system, we must change our leadership in Washington and we must change it quickly. Sadly, sadly, there is no other way. The truth is, our immigration system is worse than anybody ever realized. But the facts aren't known because the media won't report on them, the politicians won't talk about them, and the special interests spend a lot of money trying to cover them up because they are making an absolute fortune. That's the way it is. Today on a very complicated and very difficult subject, you will get the truth.

The fundamental problem with the immigration system in our country is that it serves the needs of wealthy donors, political activists, and powerful, powerful politicians It's all you can do. Thank you. Thank you.

Let me tell you who it does not serve. It does not serve you, the American people, doesn't serve you. When politicians talk about immigration reform, they usually mean the following -- amnesty, open borders, lower wage. Immigration reform should mean something else entirely. It should mean improvements to our laws and policies to make life better for American citizens.

But if we're going to make our immigration system work, then we have to be prepared to talk honestly and without fear about these important and very sensitive issues. For instance, we have to listen to the concerns that working people, our forgotten working people have over the record pace of immigration and its impact on their jobs, wages, housing, schools, tax bills, and general living conditions. These are valid concerns, expressed by decent and patriotic citizens from all backgrounds, all over. We also have to be honest about the fact that not everyone who seeks to join our country will be able to successfully assimilate.

Sometimes it's just not going to work out. It's our right as a sovereign nation, to choose immigrants that we think are the likeliest to thrive and flourish and love us. Then there is the issue of security.

Countless innocent American lives have been stolen because our politicians have failed in their duty to secure our borders and enforce our laws like they have to be enforced. I have met with many of the great parents who lost their children to sanctuary cities and open borders. So many people, so many, many people, so sad.

They will be joining me on the stage in a little while, and I look forward to introducing -- these are amazing, amazing people. Countless Americans, who have died in recent years, would be alive today if not for the open-border policies of this administration, and the administration that causes this horrible, horrible thought process. It's called Hillary Clinton. This includes incredibly Americans like 21-year-old Sarah Root.

The man who killed her arrived at the border, entered federal custody and then was released into the U.S. -- Think of it -- into the U.S. Community under the policies of the white house, Barack Obama, and Hillary Clinton. Weak. Weak. Weak policies. Weak and foolish policies. He was released again after the crime, and now he's out there at large. Sarah had graduated from college with a 4.0, top student in her class one day before her death.

Also among the victims of the obama-clinton open-border policy was grant rowanbeck, a 21-year-old convenience store clerk and a really good guy from Mesa, Arizona. A lot of you have known about Grant. He was murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member previously convicted of burglary, who had also been released from federal custody, and they knew it was gonna happen again.

Another victim is Kate Steinle. Gunned down in the sanctuary city of San Francisco, by an illegal immigrant, deported five previous times. And they knew he was no good. Then there is the case of there is the case of 90-year-old Earl Olander, who was brutally beaten and left to bleed to death in his home. 90 years old and defenseless. The perpetrators were illegal immigrants with criminal records a mile long, who did not meet Obama administration standards for removal. And they knew it was going to happen.

In California, 64-year-old air force veteran, a great woman, according to everybody that knew her, Marilyn Farris, was sexually assaulted and beaten to death with a hammer. Her killer had been arrested on multiple occasions but was never, ever deported, despite the fact that everybody wanted him out. A 2011 report from the government accountability office found that illegal immigrants and other non-citizens, in our prisons and jails together, had around 25,000 homicide arrests to their names. 25,000. On top of that, illegal immigration costs our country more than $113 billion a year. And this is what we get.

For the money we are going to spend on illegal immigration over the next ten years, we could provide one million at-risk students with a school voucher, which so many people are wanting. While there are many illegal immigrants in our country, who are good people, many, many, this doesn't change the fact that most illegal immigrants are lower skilled workers with less education, who compete directly against vulnerable American workers, and that these illegal workers draw much more out from the system than they can ever possibly pay back, and they're hurting a lot of our people that cannot get jobs under any circumstances. But these facts are never reported.

Instead, the media and my opponent discuss one thing and only one thing -- the needs of people living here illegally. In many cases, by the way, they're treated better than our vets. Not gonna happen anymore, folks. November 8. Not gonna happen anymore. [ Crowd chanting "Trump" ].

The truth is, the central issue is not the needs of the 11 million illegal immigrants or however many there may be and honestly we've been hearing that number for years. It's always 11 million. Our government has no idea. It could be three million. It could be 30 million. They have no idea what the number is. Frankly, our government has no idea what they're doing on many, many fronts, folks.

But whatever the number, that's never really been the central issue. It will never be a central issue. It doesn't matter from that standpoint. Anyone who tells you that the core issue is the needs of those living here illegally, has simply spent too much time in Washington. Only the out of touch media elites think the biggest problem facing American society -- and you know this, you know this, this is what they talk about -- facing American society today, is that there are 11 million illegal immigrants who don't have legal status.

And they also think the biggest thing, and you know this, is not nuclear, it's not ISIS, it's not Russia, it's not China, it's global warming. To all the politicians, donors, and special interests, hear these words from me and all of you today. There is only one core issue in the immigration debate, and that issue is the well-being of the American people.

Nothing even comes a close second. Hillary Clinton, for instance, talks constantly about her fears that families will be separated. But she's not talking about the American families who have been permanently separated from their oved ones because of a preventable homicide, because of a preventable death, because of murder. No, she's only talking about families who come here in violation of the law. We will treat everyone living or residing in our country with great dignity, so important. We will be fair, just, and compassionate to all. But our greatest compassion must be for our American citizens.

Thank you. President Obama and Hillary Clinton have engaged in gross dereliction of duty, by surrendering the safety of the American people to open borders, and you know it better than anybody right here in Arizona. You know it. President Obama and Hillary Clinton support sanctuary cities. They support catch and release on the border. They support Visa overstays. They support the release of dangerous, dangerous, dangerous criminals from detention. And they support unconstitutional, executive amnesty. Hillary Clinton has pledged amnesty in her first 100 days, and her plan will provide Obamacare, social security, and and medicare for illegal immigrants breaking the federal budget.

On top of that, she promises uncontrolled, low-skilled immigration that continues to reduce jobs and wages for American workers, and especially for African American and hispanic workers within our country, our citizens. Most incredibly, because to this is unbelievable, we have no idea who these people are, where they come from. I always say, Trojan horse.

Watch what's going to happen, folks. It's not going to be pretty. This includes her plan to bring in 620,000 new refugees from Syria and that region. Over a short period of time. And even yesterday when you were watching the news you saw thousands and thousands of people coming in from Syria. What is wrong with our politicians, our leaders if we can call them that? What the hell are we doing? Hard to believe. Hard to believe.

Now that you've heard about Hillary Clinton's plan, about which she has not answered a single question, let me tell you about my plan. And you notice -- and you notice all the time, for weeks and weeks they're debating my plan, debating about it, talking about it, what about this, what about that. They never even mention her plan on immigration because she doesn't want to get into the quagmire. It's a tough one. She doesn't know what she's doing except open borders and let everybody come in and destroy our country, by the way. While Hillary Clinton meets only with donors and lobbyists, my plan was crafted with the input from federal immigration officers. Very great people.

Among the top immigration experts anywhere in this country who represent workers, not corporations. Very important to us. I also worked with lawmakers who've led on this issue on behalf of American citizens for many years. And most importantly, I've met with the people directly impacted by these policies. So important.

Number one. Are you ready? Are you ready? We will build a great wall along the southern border. And Mexico will pay for the wall. 100%. They don't know it yet, but they're going to pay for the wall. And they're great people. And great leaders. But they're going to pay for the wall.

On day one we will begin working on an impenetrable physical tall powerful beautiful southern border wall. We will use the best technology including above and below ground sensors. That's the tunnels. Remember that. Above and below. Above and below-ground sensors. Towers. Aerial surveillance. And manpower to supplement the wall, find and dislocate tunnels and keep out criminal cartels. And Mexico you know that will work with us. I really believe it. Mexico will work with us. I absolutely believe it. And especially after meeting with their wonderful, wonderful president today. I really believe they want to solve this problem along with us. And I'm sure they will.

Number two. We are going to end catch and release. We catch them -- oh, go ahead. We catch them, oh, go ahead. Under my administration anyone who illegally crosses the border will be detained until they are removed out of our country and back to the country from which they came. And they'll be brought great distances. We're not dropping them right across.

They learned that. President Eisenhower. They drop them across, right across, and they'd come back. And across. Then when they flew them to a long distance, all of a sudden that was the end. We will take them great distances. But we will take them to the country where they came from. Okay?

Number three. Number three, this is the one, I think it's so great. It's hard to believe, people don't even talk about it. Zero tolerance for criminal aliens. Zero. Zero.

They don't come in here. They don't come in here. According to federal data, there are at least 2 million. 2 million. Think of it. Criminal aliens now inside of our country. 2 million people. Criminal aliens. We will begin moving them out day one. As soon as I take office. Day one. In joint operation with local, state, and federal law enforcement. Now, just so you understand, the police, who we all respect -- say hello to the police. Boy, they don't get the credit they deserve. I can tell you. They're great people. But the police and law enforcement, they know who these people are. They live with these people. They get mocked by these people. They can't do anything about these people, and they want to. They know who these people are. Day one, my first hour in office, those people are gone.

And you can call it deported if you want. The press doesn't like that term. You can call it whatever the hell you want. They're gone. Beyond the 2 million, and there are vast numbers of additional criminal illegal immigrants who have fled, but their days have run out in this country. The crime will stop. They're going to be gone. It will be over. They're going out. They're going out fast. Moving forward. We will issue detainers for illegal immigrants who are arrested for any crime whatsoever, and they will be placed into immediate removal proceedings if we even have to do that.

We will terminate the Obama administration's deadly, and it is deadly, non-enforcement policies that allow thousands of criminal aliens to freely roam our streets, walk around, do whatever they want to do, crime all over the place. That's over. That's over, folks. That's over. Since 2013 alone, the Obama administration has allowed 300,000 criminal aliens to return back into United States communities. These are individuals encounters or identified by I.C.E. But who were not detained or proceed for deportation because it wouldn't have been politically correct. My plan also includes cooperating closely with local jurisdictions to remove criminal aliens immediately. We will restore the highly successful secure communities program. Good program.

The local police, who know every one of these criminals and they know each and every one by name, by crime, where they live, they will work so fast and our local police will be so happy that they don't have to be abused by these thugs anymore. There's no great mystery to it. They've put up with it for years. And now finally, we will turn the tables and law enforcement and our police will be allowed to clear up this dangerous and threatening mess. We're also going to hire 5,000 more border patrol agents. Who gave me their endorsements, 16,500. Gave me their endorsement.

And put more of them on the border instead of behind desks, which is good. We will expand the number of border patrol stations significantly. I've had a chance to spend time with these incredible law enforcement officers, and I want to take a moment to thank them. What they do is incredible. [ Cheers and applause ] And getting their endorsement means so much to me. More to me really than I can say. Means so much. First time they've ever endorsed a presidential candidate.

Number four, block funding for sanctuary cities. We block the funding. No more funding. We will end the sanctuary cities that have resulted in so many needless deaths. Cities that refuse to cooperate with federal authorities will not receive taxpayer dollars, and we will work with congress to pass legislation to protect those jurisdictions that do assist federal authorities.

Number five, cancel unconstitutional executive orders and enforce all immigration laws. We will immediately terminate president Obama's two illegal executive amnesties in which he defied federal law and the constitution to give amnity to approximately 5 million illegal immigrants. 5 million. And how about all of the millions that are waiting on line going through the process legally? So unfair.

Hillary Clinton has pledged to keep both of these illegal amnesty programs including the 2014 amnesty which has been blocked by the United States supreme court. Great. Clinton has also pledged to add a third executive amnesty. And by the way, folks, she will be a disaster for our country. A disaster. In so many other ways. And don't forget the supreme court of the United States. Don't forget that. When you go to vote on November 8th. And don't forget your second amendment. And don't forget the repeal and replacement of Obamacare.

And don't forget building up our depleted military. And don't forget taking care of our vets. Don't forget our vets. They have been forgotten. Clinton's plan would trigger a constitutional crisis unlike almost anything we have ever seen before. In effect, she would be abolishing the lawmaking powers of congress in order to write her own laws from the oval office. And you see what bad judgment she has. She has seriously bad judgment. Can you imagine? In a trump administration all immigration laws will be enforced. Will be enforced. As with any law enforcement activity, we will set priorities. But unlike this administration, no one will be immune or exempt from enforcement.

And I.C.E. And border patrol officers will be allowed to do their jobs the way their jobs are supposed to be done.

Anyone who has entered the United States illegally is subject to deportation. That is what it means to have laws and to have a country. Otherwise, we don't have a country. Our enforcement priorities will include removing criminals, gang members, security threats, Visa overstays, public charges. That is, those relying on public welfare or straining the safety net along with millions of recent illegal arrivals and overstays who've come here under this current corrupt administration.

Number six, we are going to suspend the issuance of Visas to any place where adequate screening cannot occur. According to data provided by the senate subcommittee on immigration and the national interest, between 9/11 and the end of 2014 at least 380 foreign-born individuals were convicted in terror cases inside the United States. And even right now the largest number of people are under investigation for exactly this that we've ever had in the history of our country. Our country is a mess. We don't even know what to look for anymore, folks. Our country has to straighten out, and we have to straighten out fast. The number is likely higher.

But the administration refuses to provide this information, even to congress. As soon as I enter office, I am going to ask the department of state, which has been brutalized by Hillary Clinton, brutalized. Homeland security and the department of justice to begin a comprehensive review of these cases in order to develop a list of regions and countries from which immigration must be suspended until proven and effective vetting mechanisms can be put in place. I call it extreme vetting. Right? Extreme vetting. I want extreme. It's going to be so tough. And if somebody comes in, that's fine. But they're going to be good. It's extreme. And the people don't like it. We've got to have a country, folks. Got to have a country.

Countries from which immigration will be suspended would include places like Syria and Libya. And we are going to stop the tens of thousands of people coming in from Syria. We have no idea who they are, where they come from. There's no documentation. There's no paperwork. It's going to end badly, folks. It's going to end very, very badly. For the price of resettling one refugee in the United States, 12 could be resettled in a safe zone in their home region, which I agree with 100%. We have to build safe Zones. And we'll get the money from the gulf states. We don't want to put up the money. We owe almost $20 trillion. Double since Obama took office. Our national debt. But we will get the money from gulf states and others. We'll supervise it.

We'll build safe Zones. Which is something I think all of us want to see. Another reform involves new screening tests for all applicants that include, and this is so important, especially if you get the right people, and we will get the right people. An ideological certification to make sure that those we are admitting to our country share our values and love our people.

Thank you. We're very proud of our country, aren't we? With all it's going through, we're very proud of our country. For instance, in the last five years we've admitted nearly 100,000 immigrants from Iraq and Afghanistan. And these two countries according to pew research a majority of residents say that the barbaric practice of honor killings against women are often or sometimes justified. That's what they say. That's what they say. They're justified.

Right? And we're admitting them to our country. Applicants will be asked for their views about honor killings, about respect for women and gays and minorities. Attitudes on radical Islam, which our president refuses to say, and many other topics as part of this vetting procedure. And if we have the right people doing it, believe me, very, very few will slip through the cracks. Hopefully none.

Number seven, we will ensure that other countries take their people back when we order them deported. There are at least 23 countries that refuse to take their people back after they've been ordered to leave the United States, including large numbers of violent criminals. They won't take them back. So we say okay, we'll keep them. Not going to happen with me, folks! Not going to happen with me. Due to a supreme court decision, if these violent offenders cannot be sent home, our law enforcement officers have to release them into US communities. And by the way, the results are horrific. Horrific. There are often terrible consequences such as Casey Chadwick's tragic death in Connecticut just last year.

Yet despite the existence of a law that commands a secretary of state to stop issuing Visas to these countries, secretary Hillary Clinton ignored this law and refused to use this powerful tool to bring nations into compliance. And they would comply if we would act poly. In other words, if we had leaders that knew what they were doing. Which we don't. The result of her misconduct was the release of thousands and thousands of dangerous criminal aliens who should have been sent home to their countries. Instead, we have them all over the place. Probably a couple in this room, as a matter of fact. But I hope not.

According to the report from the Boston Globe, from the year 2008 to 2014 nearly 13,000 criminal aliens were released back into U.S. Communities because their home countries would not under any circumstances take them back. Hard to believe with the power we have. Hard to believe. We're like the big bully that keeps getting beat up. Did you ever see that? The big bully that keeps getting beat up. These 13,000 releases occurred on Hillary Clinton's watch. She had the power and the duty to stop it cold, and she decided she would not do it. And Arizona knows better than most what I'm talking about.

Those released include individuals convicted of killings, sexual assaults, and some of the most heinous crimes imaginable. "The Boston globe" writes that a globe review of 323 criminals released in new England from 2008 to 2012 found that as many as 30% committed new offenses including rape, attempted murder, and child molestation. We take them. We take them.

Number eight. We will finally complete the biometric entry/exit Visa tracking system, which we need desperately.

For years Congress has required biometric entry/exit Visa tracking systems, but it has never been completed. The politicians are all talk, no action. Never happens. Never happens. Hillary Clinton, all talk. Unfortunately, when there is action, it's always the wrong decision. Do you ever notice? In my administration we will ensure that this system is in place. And I will tell you, it will be on land.

It will be on sea. It will be in air. We will have a proper tracking system. Approximately half of new illegal immigrants came on temporary Visas and then never, ever left. Why should they? Nobody's telling them to leave. Stay as long as you want. We'll take care of you. Beyond violating our laws, Visa overstays pose -- and they really are a big problem -- pose a substantial threat to national security. The 9/11 commission said that this tracking system should be a high priority and would have assisted law enforcement and intelligence officials in August and September 2001 in conducting a search for two of the 9/11 hijackers that were in the United States on expired Visas. And you know what that would have meant.

What that could have meant. Wouldn't that have been wonderful, right? What that could have meant. Last year alone nearly half a million individuals overstayed their temporary Visas. Removing Visa overstays will be a top priority of my administration. If people around the world believe they can just come on a temporary Visa and never, ever leave, the Obama-Clinton policy, that's what it is, then we have a completely open border and we no longer have a country. We must send a message that Visa expiration dates will be strongly enforced.

Number nine, we will turn off the jobs and benefits magnet. We will ensure that e-verify is used to the fullest extent possible under existing law, and we will work with congress to strengthen and expand its use across the country. Immigration law doesn't exist for the purpose of keeping criminals out. It exists to protect all aspects of American life. The work site, the welfare office, the education system, and everything else. That is why immigration limits are established in the first place. If we only enforced the laws against crime, then we have an open border to the entire world. We will enforce all of our immigration laws. And the same goes for government benefits. The center for immigration studies estimates that 62% of households headed by illegal immigrants use some form of cash or non-cash welfare programs like food stamps or housing assistance.

Tremendous costs, by the way, to our country. Tremendous costs. This directly violates the federal public charge law design to protect the United States treasury. Those who abuse our welfare system will be priorities for immediate removal.

Number 10, we will reform legal immigration to serve the best interests of America and its workers, the forgotten people. Workers. We're going to take care of our workers. And by the way, and by the way, we're going to make great trade deals. We're going to renegotiate trade deals. We're going to bring our jobs back home. We're going to bring our jobs back home.

We have the most incompetently worked trade deals ever negotiated probably in the history of the world, and that starts with NAFTA. And now they want to go TPP, one of the great disasters. We're going to bring our jobs back home. And if companies want to leave Arizona and if they want to leave other states, there's going to be a lot of trouble for them. It's not going to be so easy. There will be consequence. Remember that. There will be consequence. They're not going to be leaving, go to another country, make the product, sell it into the the United States, and all we end up with is no taxes and total unemployment. It's not going to happen. There will be consequences. We've admitted 59 million immigrants to the United States between 1965 and 2015.

Many of these arrivals have greatly enriched our country. So true. But we now have an obligation to them and to their children to control future immigration as we are following, if you think, previous immigration waves. We've had some big waves. And tremendously positive things have happened. Incredible things have happened. To ensure assimilation we want to ensure that it works. Assimilation, an important word. Integration and upward mobility. Within just a few years immigration as a share of national population is set to break all historical records. The time has come for a new immigration commission to develop a new set of reforms to hour legal immigration system in order to achieve the following goals. To keep immigration levels measured by population share within historical norms.

To select immigrants based on their likelihood of success in U.S. Society and their ability to be financially self-sufficient. We take anybody. Come on in, anybody. Just come on in. Not anymore. You know, folks, it's called a two-way street. It is a two-way street, right? We need a system that serves our needs, not the needs of others. Remember, under a trump administration it's called America first. Remember that. To choose immigrants based on merit. Merit. Skill. And proficiency. Doesn't that sound nice?

And to establish new immigration controls to boost wages and to ensure that open jobs are offered to American workers first and that in particular African-American and Latino workers who are being shut out in this process. So unfairly. And Hillary Clinton is going to do nothing for the African-American worker, the Latino worker. She's going to do nothing. Give me your vote, she says, on November 8th. And then she'll say so long, see you in four years. That's what it is. She's going to do nothing. And just look at the past. She's done nothing. She's been there for 35 years. She's done nothing. And I say what do you have to lose? Choose me. Watch how good we're going to do together. Watch. You watch.

We want people to come into our country, but they have to come into our country legally and properly vetted and in a manner that serves the national interest. We've been living under outdated immigration rules from decades ago. They're decades and decades old. To avoid this happening, in the future I believe we should sunset our Visa laws so congress is forced to periodically revise and revisit them to bring them up to date. They're archaic. They're ancient. We wouldn't put our entire federal budget on autopilot for decades. So why should we do the same for the very, very complex subject of immigration? So let's now talk about the big picture.

These ten steps, if rigorously followed and enforced, will accomplish more in a matter of months than our politicians have accomplished on this issue in the last 50 years. That's what's going to happen, folks. Because I am proudly not a politician, because I am not beholden to any special interest, I've spent a lot of money on my campaign. I'll tell you. I write those checks. Nobody owns trump. I will get this done for you and for your family. We'll do it right. You'll be proud of our country again. We'll do it right. We will accomplish all of the steps outlined above. And when we do, peace and law and justice and prosperity will prevail. Crime will go down.

Border crossings will plummet. Gangs will disappear. And the gangs are all over the place. And welfare use will decrease. We will have a peace dividend to spend on rebuilding America beginning with our American inner cities. We're going to rebuild them for once and for all. For those here illegally today who are seeking legal status, they will have one route and one route only. To return home and apply for re-entry like everybody else under the rules of the new legal immigration system that I have outlined above. Those who have left to seek entry

Thank you. Thank you. Those who have left to seek entry under this new system, and it will be an efficient system, will not be awarded surplus Visas but will have to apply for entry under the immigration caps or limits that will be established in the future. We will break the cycle of amnesty and illegal immigration. We will break the cycle. There will be no amnesty. Our message to the world will be this. You cannot obtain legal status or become a citizen of the United States by illegally entering our country.

Can't do it. This declaration alone will help stop the crisis of illegal crossings and illegal overstays, very importantly. People will know that you can't just smuggle in, hunker down, and wait to be legalized. Not going to work that way. Those days are over. Importantly, in several years when we have accomplished all of our enforcement and deportation goals and truly ended illegal immigration for good, including the construction of a great wall which we will have built in record time and at a reasonable cost, which you never hear from the government, and the establishment of our new lawful immigration system, then and only then will we be in a position to consider the appropriate disposition of those individuals who remain. That discussion can take place only in an atmosphere in which illegal immigration is a memory of the past, no longer with us, allowing us to weigh the different options available based on the new circumstances at the time. Right now, however, we are in the middle of a jobs crisis, a border crisis, and a terrorism crisis like never before.

All energies of the federal government and the legislative process must now be focused on immigration security. That is the only conversation we should be having at this time. Immigration security. Cut it off. Whether it's dangerous materials being smuggled across the border, terrorists entering on Visas, or Americans losing their jobs to foreign workers, these are the problems we must now focus on fixing. And the media needs to begin demanding to hear Hillary Clinton's answer on how her policies will affect Americans and their security.

These are matters of life and death for our country and its people, and we deserve answers from Hillary Clinton. And you notice she doesn't answer. She didn't go to Louisiana. She didn't go to Mexico. She was invited.

She doesn't have the strength or the stamina to make America great again. Believe me. What we do know, despite the lack of media curiosity, is that Hillary Clinton promises a radical amnesty combined with a radical reduction in immigration enforcement. Just ask the border patrol about Hillary Clinton. You won't like what you're hearing. The result will be millions more illegal immigrants, thousands of more violent horrible crimes, and total chaos and lawlessness. That's what's going to happen, as sure as you're standing there. This election, and I believe this, is our last chance to secure the border, stop illegal immigration, and reform our laws to make your life better. I really believe this is it. This is our last time. November 8th. November 8th. You've got to get out and vote on November 8th. It's our last chance. It's our last chance. And that includes supreme court justices and second amendment. Remember that. So I want to remind everyone what we're fighting for and who we are fighting for. I am going to ask -- these are really special people that I've gotten to know. I'm going to ask all of the angel moms to come join me on the stage right now. These are amazing women.

These are amazing people. 've become friends with so many. But Jameel Shaw, incredible guy, lost his son so violently. These are amazing people. And I'm not asking for their endorsement. Believe me. I've gotten to know so many of them and many more from our group. But they are incredible people. And what they're going through is incredible. And there's just no reason for it. Let's give them a really tremendous hand.

That's tough stuff. I will tell you. That is tough stuff. Incredible people. So now is the time for these voices to be heard. Now is the time for the media to begin asking questions on their behalf. Now is the time for all of us as one country, Democrat, Republican, liberal, conservative, to band together to deliver justice and safety and security for all Americans. Let's fix this horrible, horrible problem. It can be fixed quickly.

Let's secure our border. Let's stop the drugs and the crime from pouring into our country. Let's protect our social security and medicare. Let's get unemployed Americans off the welfare and back to work in their own country. This has been an incredible evening. We're going to remember this evening. November 8th. We have to get everybody -- this is such an important state. November 8th. We have to get everybody to go out and vote. We're going to bring -- thank you. Thank you. We're going to take our country back, folks. This is a movement. We're going to take our country back. Thank you. Thank you.

This is an incredible movement. The world is talking about it. The world is talking about it. And by the way, if you haven't been looking at what's been happening at the polls over the last three or four days, I think you should start looking. You should start looking. Together we can save American lives, American jobs, and American futures. Together we can save America itself. Join me in this mission. We're going to make America great again.

Thank you. I love you. Thank you. God bless you, everybody.

Chief Justice Roberts, President Carter, President Clinton, President Bush, President Obama, fellow Americans and people of the world – thank you.

We the citizens of America are now joined in a great national effort to rebuild our county and restore its promise for all of our people. 

Together we will determine the course of America and the world for many, many years to come.

We will face challenges. We will confront hardships. But we will get the job done.

Every four years we gather on these steps to carry out the orderly and peaceful transfer of power.

And we are grateful to President Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama for their gracious aid throughout this transition. They have been magnificent, thank you.

Today’s ceremony, however, has very special meaning because today we are not merely transferring power from one administration to another or from one party to another – but we are transferring power from Washington DC and giving it back to you, the people.

For too long a small group in our nation’s capital has reaped the rewards of government while the people have borne the cost.

Washington flourished but the people did not share in its wealth. Politicians prospered but the jobs left and the factories closed.

The establishment protected itself but not the citizens of our country.

Their victories have not been your victories. Their triumphs have not been your triumphs. And while they celebrated in our nation's capital, there has been little to celebrate for struggling families all across our land.

That all changes starting right here and right now because this moment is your moment. It belongs to you. It belongs to everyone gathered here today and everyone watching all across America.

This is your day.

This is your celebration.

And this – the United States of America – is your country.

What truly matters is not which party controls our government but whether our government is controlled by the people.

January 20 2017, will be remembered as the day the people became the rulers of this nation again. 

The forgotten men and women of our country will be forgotten no longer. Everyone is listening to you now.

You came by the tens of millions to become part of a historic movement –  the likes of which the world has never seen before.

At the centre of this movement is a crucial conviction – that a nation exists to serve its citizens.

Americans want great schools for their children, safe neighbourhoods for their families and good jobs for themselves.

These are just and reasonable demands of righteous people and a righteous public.

But for too many of our citizens a different reality exists.

Mothers and children trapped in poverty in our inner cities, rusted out factories scattered like tombstones across the landscape of our nation.

An education system flush with cash, but which leaves our young and beautiful students deprived of all knowledge.

And the crime and the gangs and the drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealised potential.

We are one nation, and their pain is our pain, their dreams are our dreams, we share one nation, one home and one glorious destiny.

This American carnage stops right here and stops right now.

We are one nation and their their pain is our pain; their dreams are our dreams; and their success will be our success. We share one heart, one home and one glorious destiny.

The oath of office I take today is an oath of allegiance to all Americans. For many decades, we’ve enriched foreign industry at the expense of American industry, subsidised the armies of other countries, while allowing for the very sad depletion of our own military.

We've defended other nations’ borders while refusing to defend our own.

And spent trillions and trillions of dollars overseas while America’s infrastructure has fallen into disrepair and decay.

We've made other countries rich while the wealth, strength and confidence of our country has dissipated over the horizon. 

One by one, the factories shuttered and left our shores with not even a thought about the millions and millions of American workers that were left behind.

The wealth of our middle class has been ripped from their homes and then redistributed all across the world.

But that is the past and now we are looking only to the future.

We assembled here today are issuing a new decree to be heard in every city, in every foreign capital and in every hall of power – from this day forward a new vision will govern our land – from this day forward it's going to be only America first – America first!

Every decision on trade, on taxes, on immigration, on foreign affairs will be made to benefit American workers and American families.

We must protect our borders from the ravages of other countries, making our products, stealing our companies and destroying our jobs.

Protection will lead to great prosperity and strength. I will fight for you with every breath in my body and I will never ever let you down.

America will start winning again; winning like never before.

We will bring back our jobs, we will bring back our borders, we will bring back our wealth and we will bring back our dreams.

We will build new roads and highways and bridges and tunnels and railways all across our wonderful nation.

We will get our people off of welfare and back to work – rebuilding our country with American hands and American labour.

We will follow two simple rules – buy American and hire American.

We will seek friendship good will with the nations of the world but we do so with the understanding that it is the right of all nations to put their own interests first.

We do not seek to impose our way of live on anyone but, rather, to let it shine as an example. We will shine for everyone to follow.

We will reinforce old alliances and form new ones, and unite the civilised world against radical Islamic terrorism which we will eradicate from the face of the earth.

At the bedrock of our politics will be a total allegiance to the United States of America. And through our loyalty to our country we will rediscover our loyalty to each other. When you open your heart to patriotism there is no room for prejudice.

The bible tells us how good and pleasant it is when God’s people live together in unity. 

We must speak our minds openly, debate our disagreements honestly but always pursue solidarity.

When America is united, America is totally unstoppable.

There should be no fear: we are protected and we will always be protected. We will be protected by the great men and women of our military and law enforcement. And most importantly we will be protected by God.

Finally, we must think big and dream even bigger. In America we understand that a nation is only living as long as it is striving.

We will no longer accept politicians who are all talk and no action, constantly complaining but never doing anything about it.

The time for empty talk is over; now arrives the hour of action.

Do not allow anyone to tell you that it cannot be done. No challenge can match the heart and fight and spirit of America. We will not fail; our country will thrive and prosper again. 

We stand at the birth of a new millennium, ready to unlock the mysteries of space, to free the earth from the miseries of disease and to harness the energies, industries and technologies of tomorrow.

A new national pride will stir our souls, lift our sights and heal our divisions. It’s time to remember that old wisdom our soldiers will never forget, that whether we are black or brown or white, we all bleed the same red blood of patriots.

We all enjoy the same glorious freedoms and we all salute the same great American flag and whether a child is born in the urban sprawl of Detroit or the windswept plains of Nebraska, they look up at the same night sky, they fill their hearts with the same dreams, and they are infused with the breath of life by the same almighty creator.

So to all Americans in every city near and far, small and large, from mountain to mountain, from ocean to ocean, hear these words: you will never be ignored again.

Your voice, your hopes and your dreams will define our American destiny.

And your courage and goodness and love will forever guide us along the way.

Together we will make America strong again; we will make America wealthy again; we will make America proud again; we will make America safe again; and yes – together we will make America great again.

Thank you very much.

I just wanted to begin by mentioning that the nominee for secretary of the Department of Labor will be Mr. Alex Acosta. He has a law degree from Harvard Law School, was a great student; former clerk for Justice Samuel Alito. And he has had a tremendous career. He’s a member and has been a member of the National Labor Relations Board, and has been through Senate confirmation three times, confirmed; did very, very well.

And so Alex, I’ve wished him the best. We just spoke. And he’s going to be — I think he’ll be a tremendous secretary of labor.

And also as you probably heard just a little while ago, Mick Mulvaney, former congressman, has just been approved weeks late, I have to say that, weeks, weeks late, Office of Management and Budget. And he will be I think a fantastic addition.

Paul Singer just left. As you know, Paul was very much involved with the anti-Trump or as they say, “never Trump.” And Paul just left and he’s given us his total support. And it’s all about unification. We’re unifying the party and hopefully we’re going to be able to unify the country. It’s very important to me. I’ve been talking about that for a long time. It’s very, very important to me.

So I want to thank Paul Singer for being here and for coming up to the office. He was a very strong opponent, and now he’s a very strong ally. And I appreciate that.

I think I’ll say a few words, and then we’ll take some questions. And I had this time. We’ve been negotiating a lot of different transactions to save money on contracts that were terrible, including airplane contracts that were out of control and late and terrible; just absolutely catastrophic in terms of what was happening. And we’ve done some really good work. We’re very proud of that.

And then right after that, you prepare yourselves, we’ll do some questions, unless you have enough questions. That’s always a possibility.

I’m here today to update the American people on the incredible progress that has been made in the last four weeks since my inauguration. We have made incredible progress. I don’t think there’s ever been a president elected who in this short period of time has done what we’ve done.

A new Rasmussen poll, in fact — because the people get it — much of the media doesn’t get it. They actually get it, but they don’t write it. Let’s put it that way. But a new Rasmussen poll just came out just a very short while ago, and it has our approval rating at 55 percent and going up. The stock market has hit record numbers, as you know. And there has been a tremendous surge of optimism in the business world, which is — to me means something much different than it used to. It used to mean, “Oh, that’s good.” Now it means, “That’s good for jobs.” Very different.

Plants and factories are already starting to move back into the United States, and big league — Ford, General Motors, so many of them. I’m making this presentation directly to the American people, with the media present, which is an honor to have you. This morning, because many of our nation’s reporters and folks will not tell you the truth, and will not treat the wonderful people of our country with the respect that they deserve. And I hope going forward we can be a little bit — a little bit different, and maybe get along a little bit better, if that’s possible. Maybe it’s not, and that’s OK, too.

Unfortunately, much of the media in Washington, D.C., along with New York, Los Angeles in particular, speaks not for the people, but for the special interests and for those profiting off a very, very obviously broken system. The press has become so dishonest that if we don’t talk about, we are doing a tremendous disservice to the American people. Tremendous disservice. We have to talk to find out what’s going on, because the press honestly is out of control. The level of dishonesty is out of control.

I ran for president to present the citizens of our country. I am here to change the broken system so it serves their families and their communities well. I am talking — and really talking on this very entrenched power structure, and what we’re doing is we’re talking about the power structure; we’re talking about its entrenchment. As a result, the media is going through what they have to go through too often times distort — not all the time — and some of the media is fantastic, I have to say — they’re honest and fantastic.

But much of it is not a — the distortion — and we’ll talk about it, you’ll be able to ask me questions about it. But we’re not going to let it happen, because I’m here again, to take my message straight to the people. As you know, our administration inherited many problems across government and across the economy. To be honest, I inherited a mess. It’s a mess. At home and abroad, a mess. Jobs are pouring out of the country; you see what’s going on with all of the companies leaving our country, going to Mexico and other places, low pay, low wages, mass instability overseas, no matter where you look. The Middle East is a disaster. North Korea — we’ll take care of it folks; we’re going to take care of it all. I just want to let you know, I inherited a mess.

Beginning on day one, our administration went to work to tackle these challenges. On foreign affairs, we’ve already begun enormously productive talks with many foreign leaders, much of it you’ve covered, to move forward towards stability, security and peace in the most troubled regions of the world, which there are many. We have had great conversations with the United Kingdom, and meetings. Israel, Mexico, Japan, China and Canada, really, really productive conversations. I would say far more productive than you would understand.

We’ve even developed a new council with Canada to promote women’s business leaders and entrepreneurs. It’s very important to me, very important to my daughter Ivanka. I have directed our defense community headed by our great general, now Secretary Mattis. He’s over there now working very hard to submit a plan for the defeat of ISIS, a group that celebrates the murder and torture of innocent people in large sections of the world. It used to be a small group, now it’s in large sections of the world.

They’ve spread like cancer. ISIS has spread like cancer — another mess I inherited. And we have imposed new sanctions on the nation of Iran, whose totally taken advantage of our previous administration, and they’re the world’s top sponsor of terrorism, and we’re not going to stop until that problem is properly solved. And it’s not properly solved now, it’s one of the worst agreements I’ve ever seen drawn by anybody. I’ve ordered plan to begin building for the massive rebuilding of the United States military. Had great support from the Senate, I’ve had great from Congress, generally.

We’ve pursued this rebuilding in the hopes that we will never have to use this military, and I will tell you that is my — I would be so happy if we never had to use it. But our country will never have had a military like the military we’re about to build and rebuild. We have the greatest people on earth in our military, but they don’t have the right equipment and their equipment is old. I used it; I talked about it at every stop. Depleted, it’s depleted — it won’t be depleted for long. And I think one of the reason I’m standing here instead of other people is that frankly, I talked about we have to have a strong military.

We have to have a strong law enforcement also. So we do not go abroad in the search of war, we really are searching for peace, but its peace through strength. At home, we have begun the monumental task of returning the government back to the people on a scale not seen in many, many years. In each of these actions, I’m keeping my promises to the American people. These are campaign promises. Some people are so surprised that we’re having strong borders.

Well, that’s what I’ve been talking about for a year and a half, strong borders. They’re so surprised, oh, he having strong borders, well that’s what I’ve been talking about to the press and to everybody else. One promise after another after years of politicians lying to you to get elected. They lied to the American people in order to get elected. Some of the things I’m doing probably aren’t popular but they’re necessary for security and for other reasons.

And then coming to Washington and pursuing their own interests which is more important to many politicians. I’m here following through on what I pledged to do. That’s all I’m doing. I put it out before the American people, got 306 Electoral College votes. I wasn’t supposed to get 222. They said there’s no way to get 222, 230’s impossible.

270 which you need, that was laughable. We got 306 because people came out and voted like they’ve never seen before so that’s the way it goes. I guess it was the biggest Electoral College win since Ronald Reagan. In other words, the media’s trying to attack our administration because they know we are following through on pledges that we made and they’re not happy about it for whatever reason.

And — but a lot of people are happy about it. In fact, I’ll be in Melbourne, Florida five o’clock on Saturday and I heard — just heard that the crowds are massive that want to be there. I turn on the T.V., open the newspapers and I see stories of chaos. Chaos. Yet it is the exact opposite. This administration is running like a fine-tuned machine, despite the fact that I can’t get my cabinet approved.

And they’re outstanding people like Senator Dan Coats who’s there, one of the most respected men of the Senate. He can’t get approved. How do you not approve him? He’s been a colleague — highly respected. Brilliant guy, great guy, everybody knows it. We’re waiting for approval. So we have a wonderful group of people that’s working very hard, that’s being very much misrepresented about and we can’t let that happen.

So, if the Democrats who have — all you have to do is look at where they are right now. The only thing they can do is delay because they screwed things up royally, believe me. Let me list to you some of the things that we’ve done in just a short period of time. I just got here. And I got here with no cabinet. Again, each of these actions is a promise I made to the American people.

I’ll go over just some of them and we have a lot happening next week and in the weeks — in the weeks coming. We’ve withdrawn from the job-killing disaster known as Trans Pacific Partnership. We’re going to make trade deals but we’re going to have one on one deals, bilateral. We’re going to have one on one deals.

We’ve directed the elimination of regulations that undermine manufacturing and call for expedited approval of the permits needed for America and American infrastructure and that means plant, equipment, roads, bridges, factories. People take 10, 15, 20 years to get disapproved for a factory. They go in for a permit, it’s many, many years. And then at the end of the process — they spend 10s of millions of dollars on nonsense and at the end of the process, they get rejected.

Now, they may be rejected with me but it’s going to be a quick rejection. Not going to take years. But mostly it’s going to be an acceptance. We want plants built and we want factories built and we want the jobs. We don’t want the jobs going to other countries. We’ve imposed a hiring freeze on nonessential federal workers. We’ve imposed a temporary moratorium on new federal regulations.

We’ve issued a game-changing new rule that says for each one new regulation, two old regulations must be eliminated. Makes sense. Nobody’s ever seen regulations like we have. You go to other countries and you look at indexes (ph) they have and you say “let me see your regulations” and they’re fraction, just a tiny fraction of what we have. And I want regulations because I want safety, I want environmental — all environmental situations to be taken properly care of. It’s very important to me. But you don’t need four or five or six regulations to take care of the same thing.

We’ve stood up for the men and women of law enforcement, directing federal agencies to ensure they are protected from crimes of violence. We’ve directed the creation of a task force for reducing violent crime in America, including the horrendous situation — take a look at Chicago and others, taking place right now in our inner cities. Horrible.

We’ve ordered the Department of Homeland Security and Justice to coordinate on a plan to destroy criminal cartels coming into the United States with drugs. We’re becoming a drug infested nation. Drugs are becoming cheaper than candy bars. We are not going to let it happen any longer.

We’ve undertaken the most substantial border security measures in a generation to keep our nation and our tax dollars safe. And are now in the process of beginning to build a promised wall on the southern border, met with general — now Secretary Kelly yesterday and we’re starting that process. And the wall is going to be a great wall and it’s going to be a wall negotiated by me. The price is going to come down just like it has on everything else I’ve negotiated for the government. And we are going to have a wall that works, not gonna have a wall like they have now which is either nonexistent or a joke.

We’ve ordered a crackdown on sanctuary cities that refuse to comply with federal law and that harbor criminal aliens, and we have ordered an end to the policy of catch and release on the border. No more release. No matter who you are, release. We have begun a nationwide effort to remove criminal aliens, gang members, drug dealers and others who pose a threat to public safety. We are saving American lives every single day.

The court system has not made it easy for us. And are even creating a new office in Homeland Security dedicated to the forgotten American victims of illegal immigrant violence, which there are many. We have taken decisive action to keep radical Islamic terrorists out of our country. No parts are necessary and constitutional actions were blocked by judges, in my opinion, incorrect, and unsafe ruling. Our administration is working night and day to keep you safe, including reporters safe. And is vigorously defending this lawful order.

I will not back down from defending our country. I got elected on defense of our country. I keep my campaign promises, and our citizens will be very happy when they see the result. They already are, I can tell you that. Extreme vetting will be put in place and it already is in place in many places.

In fact, we had to go quicker than we thought because of the bad decision we received from a circuit that has been overturned at a record number. I have heard 80 percent, I find that hard to believe, that is just a number I heard, that they are overturned 80 percent of the time. I think that circuit is — that circuit is in chaos and that circuit is frankly in turmoil. But we are appealing that, and we are going further.

We’re issuing a new executive action next week that will comprehensively protect our country. So we’ll be going along the one path and hopefully winning that, at the same time we will be issuing a new and very comprehensive order to protect our people. That will be done sometime next week, toward the beginning or middle at the latest part. We have also taken steps to begin construction of the Keystone Pipeline and Dakota Access Pipelines. Thousands and thousands of jobs, and put new buy American measures in place to require American steel for American pipelines. In other words, they build a pipeline in this country, and we use the powers of government to make that pipeline happen, we want them to use American steel. And they are willing to do that, but nobody ever asked before I came along. Even this order was drawn and they didn’t say that.

And I’m reading the order, I’m saying, why aren’t we using American steel? And they said, that’s a good idea, we put it in. To drain the swamp of corruption in Washington, D.C., I’ve started by imposing a five-year lobbying ban on White House officials and a lifetime ban on lobbying for a foreign government.

We’ve begun preparing to repeal and replace Obamacare. Obamacare is a disaster, folks. It is’s disaster. I know you can say, oh, Obamacare. I mean, they fill up our alleys with people that you wonder how they get there, but they are not the Republican people our that representatives are representing.

So we’ve begun preparing to repeal and replace Obamacare, and are deep in the midst of negotiations on a very historic tax reform to bring our jobs back, to bring our jobs back to this country. Big league. It’s already happening. But big league.

I’ve also worked to install a cabinet over the delays and obstruction of Senate Democrats. You’ve seen what they’ve done over the last long number of years. That will be one of the great cabinets ever assembled in American history.

You look at Rex Tillerson. He’s out there negotiating right now. General Mattis I mentioned before, General Kelly. We have great, great people. Mick is with us now. We have great people.

Among their responsibilities will be ending the bleeding of jobs from our country and negotiating fair trade deals for our citizens.

Now look, fair trade. Not free, fair. If a country is taking advantage of us, not going to let that happen anymore. Every country takes advantage of us almost. I may be able to find a couple that don’t. But for the most part, that would be a very tough job for me to do.

Jobs have already started to surge. Since my election, Ford announced it will abandon its plans to build a new factory in Mexico, and will instead invest $700 million in Michigan, creating many, many jobs.

Fiat Chrysler announced it will invest $1 billion in Ohio and Michigan, creating 2,000 new American jobs. They were with me a week ago. You know you were here.

General Motors likewise committed to invest billions of dollars in its American manufacturing operation, keeping many jobs here that were going to leave. And if I didn’t get elected, believe me, they would have left. And these jobs and these things that I’m announcing would never have come here.

Intel just announced that it will move ahead with a new plant in Arizona that probably was never going to move ahead with. And that will result in at least 10,000 American jobs.

Walmart announced it will create 10,000 jobs in the United States just this year because of our various plans and initiatives. There will be many, many more, many more, these are a few that we’re naming.

Other countries have been taking advantage of us for decades — decades, and decades, and decades, folks. And we’re not going to let that happen anymore. Not going to let it happen.

And one more thing, I have kept my promise to the American people by nominating a justice of the United States Supreme Court, Judge Neil Gorsuch, who is from my list of 20, and who will be a true defender of our laws and our Constitution, highly respected, should get the votes from the Democrats. You may not see that. But he’ll get there one way or the other. But he should get there the old-fashioned way, and he should get those votes.

This last month has represented an unprecedented degree of action on behalf of the great citizens of our country. Again, I say it. There has never been a presidency that’s done so much in such a short period of time. And we have not even started the big work yet. That starts early next week.

Some very big things are going to be announced next week. So we are just getting started. We will be giving a speech, as I said, in Melbourne, Florida, at 5:00 p.m. I hope to see you there.

And with that, I just say, God bless America, and let’s take some questions.

Mara (ph), Mara (ph), go ahead. You were cut off pretty violently at our last news conference.

Mike Flynn is a fine person, and I asked for his resignation. He respectfully gave it. He is a man who there was a certain amount of information given to Vice President Pence, who is with us today. And I was not happy with the way that information was given.

He didn’t have to do that, because what he did wasn’t wrong — what he did in terms of the information he saw. What was wrong was the way that other people, including yourselves in this room, were given that information, because that was classified information that was given illegally. That’s the real problem.

And, you know, you can talk all you want about Russia, which was all a, you know, fake news, fabricated deal, to try and make up for the loss of the Democrats and the press plays right into it. In fact, I saw a couple of the people that were supposedly involved with all of this — that they know nothing about it; they weren’t in Russia; they never made a phone call to Russia; they never received a phone call.

It’s all fake news. It’s all fake news. The nice thing is, I see it starting to turn, where people are now looking at the illegal — I think it’s very important — the illegal, giving out classified information. It was — and let me just tell you, it was given out like so much.

I’ll give you an example. I called, as you know, Mexico. It was a very, very confidential, classified call. But I called Mexico. And in calling Mexico, I figured, oh, well that’s — I spoke to the president of Mexico; I had a good call. All of a sudden, it’s out there for the world to see. It’s supposed to be secret. It’s supposed to be either confidential or classified, in that case.

Same thing with Australia. All of a sudden, people are finding out exactly what took place. The same thing happened with respect to General Flynn. Everybody saw this. And I’m saying — the first thing I thought of when I heard about it is: How does the press get this information that’s classified? How do they do it?

You know why? Because it’s an illegal process and the press should be ashamed of themselves. But more importantly, the people that gave out the information to the press should be ashamed of themselves, really ashamed.

Yes, go ahead.

Because when I looked at the information, I said, “I don’t think he did anything wrong; if anything, he did something right.” He was coming into office. He looked at the information. He said, “Huh, that’s fine.” That’s what they’re supposed to do. They’re supposed to — he didn’t just call Russia. He called and spoke to both ways, I think there were 30-some-odd countries. He’s doing the job.

You know, he was doing his job. The thing is, he didn’t tell our vice president properly, and then he said he didn’t remember. So either way, it wasn’t very satisfactory to me. And I have somebody that I think will be outstanding for the position. And that also helps, I think, in the making of my decision.

But he didn’t tell the vice president of the United States the facts. And then he didn’t remember. And that just wasn’t acceptable to me.

Yes?

I think the one person — I don’t think I’ve ever spoken to him. I don’t think I’ve ever met him. And he actually said he was a very low-level member of I think a committee for a short period of time. I don’t think I ever met him. Now, it’s possible that I walked into a room and he was sitting there, but I don’t think I ever met him. I didn’t talk to him ever. And he thought it was a joke.

The other person said he never spoke to Russia; never received a call. Look at his phone records, et cetera, et cetera. And the other person, people knew that he represented various countries, but I don’t think he represented Russia, but knew that he represented various countries. That’s what he does. I mean, people know that.

That’s Mr. Manafort, who’s — by the way, who’s by the way a respected man. He’s a respected man. But I think he represented the Ukraine or Ukraine government or somebody, but everybody — people knew that. Everybody knew that.

So, these people — and he said that he has absolutely nothing to do and never has with Russia. And he said that very forcefully. I saw his statement. He said it very forcefully. Most of the papers don’t print it because that’s not good for their stories.

So the three people that they talked about all totally deny it. And I can tell you, speaking for myself, I own nothing in Russia. I have no loans in Russia. I don’t have any deals in Russia. President Putin called me up very nicely to congratulate me on the win of the election.

He then, called me up extremely nicely to congratulate me on the inauguration, which was terrific. But so did many other leaders, almost all other leaders from almost all of the country. So that’s the extent.

Russia is fake news. Russia — this is fake news put out by the media. The real news is the fact that people, probably from the Obama administration because they’re there, because we have our new people going in place, right now.

As you know, Mike Pompeo has — has now taken control of the CIA, James Comey at FBI, Dan Coats is waiting to be approved, I mean he is a senator and a highly respected one and he’s still waiting to be approved. But our new people are going in.

And just while you’re at it, because you mentioned this, Wall Street Journal did a story today that was almost as disgraceful as the failing New York Time’s story, yesterday. And it talked about — these are (ph) front page.

So director of national intelligence just put out, acting a statement, any suggestion that the United States intelligence community, this was just given to us, is withholding information and not providing the best possible intelligence to the president and his national security team is not true.

So they took this front page story out of The Wall Street Journal top and they just wrote the story that its not true. And I’ll tell you something, I’ll be honest, because I sort of enjoy this back and forth that I guess I have all my life but I’ve never seen more dishonest media than frankly, the political media. I thought the financial media was much better, much more honest.

But I will say that, I never get phone calls from the media. How did they write a story like that in The Wall Street Journal without asking me or how did they write a story in The New York Times, put it on front page?

That was like the story they wrote about the women and me, front page, big massive story. And it was nasty and then they called, they said we never said that, we like Mr. Trump. They called up my office, we like Mr. Trump, we never said that.

And it was totally — they totally misrepresented those very wonderful women, I have to tell you, totally misrepresented. I said give us the retraction. They never gave us a retraction and frankly, I then went on to other things.

OK, go ahead.

Yeah.

...I’m skipping that information, I don’t know, I was just given (ph) we had a very, very big margin.

Well, I don’t know, I was given that information. I was given — I actually, I’ve seen that information around. But it was a very substantial victory, do you agree with that? OK thank you, that’s...

Go ahead Sir, yes?

What— what evidence did you weigh to determine that there was no wrongdoing? Further to that, Sir, you said on a couple of locations this morning, you are going to aggressively pursue the source of these leaks.

We are.

Well, first of all about that, we now have Dan Coats, hopefully soon, Mike Pompeo and James Comey and they’re in position so I hope that we’ll be able to straighten that out without using anybody else.

The gentleman you mentioned is a very talented man, very successful man and he’s offered his services and you know, it’s something we may take advantage of. But I don’t think we’re need that at all because of the fact that you know, I think that we are gonna be able to straighten it out very easily on its own.

As far as the general’s concerned, when I first heard about it, I said huh, that doesn’t sound wrong. My counsel came, Don McGahn, White House Counsel, and he told me and I asked him, he can speak very well for himself. He said he doesn’t think anything is wrong, you know, really didn’t think.

It was really, what happened after that but he didn’t think anything was done wrong. I didn’t either because I waited a period of time and I started to think about it, I said “well I don’t see” — to me, he was doing the job.

The information was provided by — who I don’t know, Sally Yates. And I was a little surprised because I said “doesn’t sound like he did anything wrong there.” But he did something wrong with respect to the vice president and I thought that was not acceptable. As far as — as far as the actual making the call, fact I’ve watched various programs and I’ve read various articles where he was just doing his job.
President Trump’s News Conference: Live Analysis

President Trump is expected to announce a new nominee for secretary of labor. Times reporters will be following live and offering analysis.

That was very normal. You know, first everybody got excited because they thought he did something wrong. After they thought about it, it turned out he was just doing his job. So — and I do. And by the way, with all of that being said, I do think he’s a fine man.

...Go ahead. Finish off then I’ll get you.

...Yes, we’re looking at them very — very, very serious. I’ve gone to all of the folks in charge of the various agencies and we’re — I’ve actually called the Justice Department to look into the leaks. Those are criminal leaks. They’re put out by people either in agencies — I think you’ll see it stopping because now we have our people in. You know, again, we don’t have our people in because we can’t get them approved by the Senate.

We just had Jeff Sessions approved. Injustice, as an example (ph). So, we are looking into that very seriously. It’s a criminal act. You know what I say, when I — when I was called out on Mexico, I was shocked because all this equipment, all this incredible phone equipment — when I was called out on Mexico, I was — honestly, I was really, really surprised.

But I said “you know, it doesn’t make sense. That won’t happen” but that wasn’t that important a call, it was fine, I could show it to the world and he could show it to the world, the president who’s a very fine man, by the way. Same thing with Australia. I said “that’s terrible that it was leaked” but it wasn’t that important. But then I said to myself “what happens when I’m dealing with the problem of North Korea?”

What happens when I’m dealing with the problems in the Middle East? Are you folks going to be reporting all of that very, very confidential information, very important, very — you know, I mean at the highest level? Are you going to be reporting about that too? So, I don’t want classified information getting out to the public and in a way that was almost a test.

So I’m dealing with Mexico, I’m dealing with Argentina, we were dealing on this case with Mike Flynn. All this information gets put into the “Washington Post” and gets put into the “New York Times” and I’m saying “what’s going to happen when I’m dealing on the Middle East? What’s going to happen when I’m dealing with really, really important subjects like North Korea?

We got to stop it. That’s why it’s a criminal penalty.

Well the leaks are real. You’re the one that wrote about them and reported them, I mean the leaks are real. You know what they said, you saw it and the leaks are absolutely real. The news is fake because so much of the news is fake. So one thing that I felt it was very important to do — and I hope we can correct it. Because there’s nobody I have more respect for — well, maybe a little bit but the reporters, good reporters.

It’s very important to me and especially in this position. It’s very important. I don’t mind bad stories. I can handle a bad story better than anybody as long as it’s true and, you know, over a course of time, I’ll make mistakes and you’ll write badly and I’m OK with that. But I’m not OK when it is fake. I mean, I watch CNN, it’s so much anger and hatred and just the hatred.

I don’t watch it any more because it’s very good — he’s saying no. It’s OK, Jim (ph). It’s OK, Jim (ph), you’ll have your chance. But I watch others too. You’re not the only one so don’t feel badly. But I think it should be straight. I think it should be — I think it would be frankly more interesting. I know how good everybody’s ratings are right now but I think that actually — I think that’d actually be better.

People — I mean, you have a lower approval rate than Congress. I think that’s right. I don’t know, Peter (ph), is that one right? Because you know I think they have lower — I heard lower than Congress. But honestly, the public would appreciate it, I’d appreciate it — again, I don’t mind bad stories when it’s true but we have an administration where the Democrats are making it very difficult.

I think we’re setting a record or close to a record in the time of approval of a cabinet. I mean, the numbers are crazy. When I’m looking, some of them had them approved immediately.

I’m going forever and I still have a lot of people that we’re waiting for. And that’s all they’re doing, is delaying. And you look at Schumer and the mess that he’s got over there and they have nothing going. The only thing they can do is delay. And, you know, I think that they’d be better served by, you know, approving and making sure that they’re happy and everybody’s good.

And sometimes — I mean, I know President Obama lost three or four, and you lose them on the way, and that’s OK. That’s fine. But I think it would — I think they would be much better served, John, if they just went through the process quickly. This is pure delay tactics.

And they say it, and everybody understands it. Yeah, go ahead, Jimmy.

Well, I had nothing to do with it. I have nothing to do with Russia. I told you, I have no deals there, I have no anything. Now, when WikiLeaks, which I had nothing to do with, comes out and happens to give, they’re not giving classified information. They’re giving stuff — what was said at an office about Hillary cheating on the debates.

Which, by the way, nobody mentions. Nobody mentions that Hillary received the questions to the debates. Can you imagine — seriously — can you imagine if I received the questions? It would be the electric chair. OK, he should be put in the electric — you would even call for the reinstitution of the death penalty, OK. Maybe not you John. Yes? We’ll do you next Jim, I do you next(ph).

Yes, yes, sure

No, I didn’t.

No, I didn’t.

Excuse me.

No, I fired him because of what he said to Mike Pence. Very simple. Mike was doing his job. He was calling countries and his counterparts. So, it certainly would have been OK with me if he did it. I would have directed him to do it if I thought he wasn’t doing it.

I didn’t direct him, but I would have directed him because that’s his job. And it came out that way — and in all fairness, I watched Dr. Charles Krauthammer the other night say he was doing his job and I agreed with him. And since then, I’ve watched many other people say that.

No, I didn’t direct him, but I would have directed him if he didn’t do it. OK? Jim?

OK.

Ask — ask Jeff Zucker how he got his job. OK?

Well, that’s — well, you know, we do have other people. You do have other people and your ratings aren’t as good as some of the other people that are waiting.

OK, go ahead, John.

I was OK with it.

No — no, but I did say 30. But it was actually higher than that.

OK, fair question. Ready?

No — no, but let me do one at a time.

Do you mind?

All right. So, in one case, you’re talking about highly classified information. In the other case, you’re talking about John Podesta saying bad things about the boss. I will say this, if John Podesta said that about me and he was working for me, I would have fired him so fast your head would have spun.

He said terrible things about her. But it wasn’t classified information. But in one case, you’re talking about classified — regardless, if you look at the RNC, we had a very strong — at my suggestion — and I give Reince great credit for this — at my suggestion, because I know something about this world, I said I want a very strong defensive mechanism.

I don’t want to be hacked. And we did that. And you have seen that they tried to hack us and they failed. The DNC did not do that. And if they did it, they could not have been hacked. But they were hacked and terrible things came in. And, you know, the only thing that I do think is unfair is some of the things were so — they were — when I heard some of those things I picked up the papers the next morning and said, oh, this is going to be front page, it wasn’t even in the papers.

Again, if I had that happen to me, it would be the biggest story in the history of publishing or the head of newspapers. I would have been headline in every newspaper. I mean, think of it. They gave her the questions to a debate and she — and she should have reported herself.

Why did Hillary Clinton announce that, “I’m sorry, but I have been given the questions to a debate or a town hall, and I feel that it’s inappropriate, and I want to turn in CNN for not doing a good job.

The reporting is fake. Look, look...

You know what it is? Here’s the thing. The public isn’t — you know, they read newspapers, they see television, they watch. They don’t know if it’s true or false because they’re not involved. I’m involved. I’ve been involved with this stuff all my life. But I’m involved. So I know when you’re telling the truth or when you’re not. I just see many, many untruthful things.

And I’ll tell you what else I see. I see tone. You know the word “tone.” The tone is such hatred. I’m really not a bad person, by the way. No, but the tone is such — I do get good ratings, you have to admit that — the tone is such hatred.

I watched this morning a couple of the networks. And I have to say, Fox & Friends in the morning, they’re very honorable people. They’re very — not because they’re good, because they hit me also when I do something wrong. But they have the most honest morning show. That’s all I can say. It’s the most honest.

But the tone, Jim. If you look — the hatred. The, I mean, sometimes — sometimes somebody gets...

Well, you look at your show that goes on at 10 o’clock in the evening. You just take a look at that show. That is a constant hit. The panel is almost always exclusive anti-Trump. The good news is he doesn’t have good ratings. But the panel is almost exclusive anti-Trump. And the hatred and venom coming from his mouth; the hatred coming from other people on your network.

Now, I will say this. I watch it. I see it. I’m amazed by it. And I just think you’d be a lot better off, I honestly do. The public gets it, you know. Look, when I go to rallies, they turn around, they start screaming at CNN. They want to throw their placards at CNN. You know.

I — I think you would do much better by being different. But you just take a look. Take a look at some of your shows in the morning and the evening. If a guest comes out and says something positive about me, it’s — it’s brutal.

Now, they’ll take this news conference — I’m actually having a very good time, OK? But they’ll take this news conference — don’t forget, that’s the way I won. Remember, I used to give you a news conference every time I made a speech, which was like every day. OK?

No, that’s how I won. I won with news conferences and probably speeches. I certainly didn’t win by people listening to you people. That’s for sure. But I’m having a good time.

Tomorrow, they will say, “Donald Trump rants and raves at the press.” I’m not ranting and raving. I’m just telling you. You know, you’re dishonest people. But — but I’m not ranting and raving. I love this. I’m having a good time doing it.

But tomorrow, the headlines are going to be, “Donald Trump rants and raves.” I’m not ranting and raving.

Go ahead.

Should I let him have a little bit more? What do you think, Peter? Peter, should I have — let him have a little bit more?

Sit down. Sit down. We’ll...

I’m changing it from fake news, though.

Very fake news.

(LAUGHTER)

Go ahead.

And you’re not related to our new...

I looked — you know, I looked at that name. I said, wait a minute, is there any relation there? Alex Acosta.

OK. Now I checked it — I said — they said, “No, sir.” I said, “Do me a favour, go back and check the family tree.”

I do that.

No, no. I do that. Here’s the thing. OK. I understand what you’re — and you’re right about that, except this. See, I know when I should get good and when I should get bad. And sometimes I’ll say, “Wow, that’s going to be a great story.” And I’ll get killed.

I know what’s good and bad. I’d be a pretty good reporter, not as good as you. But I know what’s good. I know what’s bad. And when they change it and make it really bad, something that should be positive — sometimes something that should be very positive, they’ll make OK. They’ll even make it negative.

So I understand it. So, because I’m there. I know what was said. I know who’s saying it. I’m there. So it’s very important to me.

Look, I want to see an honest press. When I started off today by saying that it’s so important to the public to get an honest press. The press — the public doesn’t believe you people anymore. Now, maybe I had something to do with that. I don’t know. But they don’t believe you. If you were straight and really told it like it is, as Howard Cosell used to say, right?

Of course, he had some questions also. But if you were straight, I would be your biggest booster. I would be your biggest fan in the world, including bad stories about me. But if you go — as an example, you’re CNN, I mean it’s story after story after story is bad. I won. I won. And the other thing, chaos because zero chaos. We are running — this is a fine-tuned machine and Reince happens to be doing a good job but half of his job is putting out lies by the press (ph).

You know, I said to him yesterday this whole Russia scam that you guys are building so that you don’t talk about the real subject which is illegal leaks, but I watched him yesterday working so hard to try and get that story proper. And I’m saying “here’s my chief of staff,” a really good guy, did a phenomenal job at RNC. I mean, he won the election, right?

We won the presidency. We got some senators, we got some — all over the country, you take a look, he’s done a great job. And I said to myself, you know — and I said to somebody that was in the room, I said “you take a look at Reince, he’s working so hard just putting out fires that are fake fires.” I mean, they’re fake. They’re not true. And isn’t that a shame because he’d rather be working on healthcare, he’d rather be working on tax reform, Jim (ph).

I mean that. I would be your biggest fan in the world if you treated me right. I sort of understand there’s a certain bias maybe by Jeff (ph) or somebody, you know — you know, whatever reason. But — and I understand that. But you’ve got to be at least a little bit fair and that’s why the public sees it. They see it. They see it’s not fair. You take a look at some of your shows and you see the bias and the hatred.

And the public is smart, they understand it. Go ahead.

...I think they don’t believe it. I don’t think the public — that’s why the Rasmussen poll just has me through the roof. I don’t think they believe it. Well, I guess one of the reasons I’m here today is to tell you the whole Russian thing, that’s a ruse. That’s a ruse. And by the way, it would be great if we could get along with Russia, just so you understand that.

Now tomorrow, you’ll say “Donald Trump wants to get along with Russia, this is terrible.” It’s not terrible. It’s good. We had Hillary Clinton try and do a reset. We had Hillary Clinton give Russia 20 percent of the uranium in our country. You know what uranium is, right? This thing called nuclear weapons like lots of things are done with uranium including some bad things.

Nobody talks about that. I didn’t do anything for Russia. I’ve done nothing for Russia. Hillary Clinton gave them 20 percent of our uranium. Hillary Clinton did a reset, remember? With the stupid plastic button that made us all look like a bunch of jerks. Here, take a look. He looked at her like, what the hell is she doing with that cheap plastic button?

Hillary Clinton — that was the reset, remember it said reset? Now if I do that, oh, I’m a bad guy. If we could get along with Russia, that’s a positive thing. We have a very talented man, Rex Tillerson, who’s going to be meeting with them shortly and I told him. I said “I know politically it’s probably not good for me.” The greatest thing I could do is shoot that ship that’s 30 miles off shore right out of the water.

Everyone in this country’s going to say “oh, it’s so great.” That’s not great. That’s not great. I would love to be able to get along with Russia. Now, you’ve had a lot of presidents that haven’t taken that tack. Look where we are now. Look where we are now. So, if I can — now, I love to negotiate things, I do it really well, and all that stuff. But — but it’s possible I won’t be able to get along with Putin.

Maybe it is. But I want to just tell you, the false reporting by the media, by you people, the false, horrible, fake reporting makes it much harder to make a deal with Russia. And probably Putin said “you know.” He’s sitting behind his desk and he’s saying “you know, I see what’s going on in the United States, I follow it closely. It’s going to be impossible for President Trump to ever get along with Russia because of all the pressure he’s got with this fake story.” OK?

And that’s a shame because if we could get along with Russia — and by the way, China and Japan and everyone. If we could get along, it would be a positive thing, not a negative thing.

Tax reform is going to happen fairly quickly. We’re doing Obamacare. We’re in final stages. We should be submitting the initial plan in March, early March, I would say. And we have to, as you know, statutorily and for reasons of budget, we have to go first. It’s not like, frankly, the tax would be easier, in my opinion, but for statutory reasons and for budgetary reasons, we have to submit the healthcare sooner.

So we’ll be submitting healthcare sometime in early March, mid- March. And after that, we’re going to come up, and we’re doing very well on tax reform.

Yes?

OK.

Not good.

Not good.

Excuse me, excuse me. When did it happen? It happened when, if you were Putin right now, you would say, “Hey, we’re back to the old games with the United States; there’s no way Trump can ever do a deal with us.” Because the — you have to understand. If I was just brutal on Russia right now, just brutal, people would say, you would say, “Oh, isn’t that wonderful.” But I know you well enough.

Then you would say, “Oh, he was too tough; he shouldn’t have done that.” Look, all of the...

Wait a minute. Wait, wait. Excuse me just one second.

All of those things that you mentioned are very recent, because probably Putin assumes that he’s not going to be able to make a deal with me because it’s politically not popular for me to make a deal. So Hillary Clinton tries a reset. It failed. They all tried. But I’m different than those people.

Go ahead.

I have. I have. And I’m so beautifully represented. I’m so honored that the Senate approved him. He’s going to be fantastic.

Yes, I think that I’ve already...

No, I don’t think so. I think Putin probably assumes that he can’t make a deal with me anymore because politically it would be unpopular for a politician to make a deal. I can’t believe I’m saying I’m a politician, but I guess that’s what I am now.

Because, look, it would be much easier for me to be tough on Russia, but then we’re not going to make a deal.

Now, I don’t know that we’re going to make a deal. I don’t know. We might. We might not. But it would be much easier for me to be so tough — the tougher I am on Russia, the better. But you know what? I want to do the right thing for the American people. And to be honest, secondarily, I want to do the right thing for the world.

If Russia and the United States actually got together and got along — and don’t forget, we’re a very powerful nuclear country and so are they. There’s no upside. We’re a very powerful nuclear country and so are they. I have been briefed. And I can tell you one thing about a briefing that we’re allowed to say because anybody that ever read the most basic book can say it, nuclear holocaust would be like no other.

They’re a very powerful nuclear country and so are we. If we have a good relationship with Russia, believe me, that’s a good thing, not a bad thing.

Who did I say is not good?

No, it’s not good, but they happened.

They all happened recently.

No...
Get the Morning Briefing by Email

What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.
Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.

    See Sample Privacy Policy 

They all happened recently. And I understand what they’re doing because they’re doing the same thing.

Now, again, maybe I’m not going to be able to do a deal with Russia, but at least I will have tried. And if I don’t, does anybody really think that Hillary Clinton would be tougher on Russia than Donald Trump? Does anybody in this room really believe that? OK?

But I tell you one thing, she tried to make a deal. She had the reset. She gave all that valuable uranium away. She did other things. You know, they say I’m close to Russia. Hillary Clinton gave away 20 percent of the uranium in the United States. She’s close to Russia.

I gave — you know what I gave to Russia? You know what I gave? Nothing.

I’m not going to tell you anything about what response I do. I don’t talk about military response. I don’t say I’m going into Mosul in four months. “We are going to attack Mosul in four months.” Then three months later, “We are going to attack Mosul in one month.” “Next week, we are going to attack Mosul.”

In the meantime, Mosul is very, very difficult. Do you know why? Because I don’t talk about military, and I don’t talk about certain other things, you’re going to be surprised to hear that. And by the way, my whole campaign, I’d say that. So I don’t have to tell you. I don’t want to be one of these guys that say, “Yes, here’s what we’re going to do.” I don’t have to do that. I don’t have to tell you what I’m going to do in North Korea.

Wait a minute. I don’t have to tell you what I’m going to do in North Korea. And I don’t have to tell you what I’m going to do with Iran. You know why? Because they shouldn’t know. And eventually, you guys are going to get tired of asking that question.

So when you ask me what am I going to do with a ship, the Russian ship as an example, I’m not going to tell you. But hopefully, I won’t have to do anything, but I’m not going to tell you.

OK.

Where are you from?

Here’s another beauty.

Yeah. Sure.

Just like CNN right?

Yeah, I do. I do. Let me tell you about this government...

Wait. Wait. I know who you are. Just wait.

Let me tell you about the travel ban. We had a very smooth rollout of the travel ban. But we had a bad court. Got a bad decision. We had a court that’s been overturned. Again, may be wrong. But I think it’s 80 percent of the time, a lot.

We had a bad decision. We’re going to keep going with that decision. We’re going to put in a new executive order next week some time. But we had a bad decision.

That’s the other thing that was wrong with the travel ban. You had Delta with a massive problem with their computer system at the airports. You had some people that were put out there, brought by very nice busses, and they were put out at various locations.

Despite that the only problem that we had is we had a bad court. We had a court that gave us what I consider to be, with great respect, a very bad decision. Very bad for the safety and security of our country. The rollout was perfect.

Now, what I wanted to do was do the exact same executive order, but said one thing. I said this to my people. Give them a one-month period of time. But Gen. Kelly, now Sec. Kelly, said if you do that, all these people will come in and (inaudible) the bad ones.

You do agree there are bad people out there, right? That not everybody that’s like you. You have some bad people out there.

Kelly said you can’t do that. And he was right. As soon as he said it I said wow, never thought of it. I said how about one week? He said no good. You got to do it immediately because if you do it immediately they don’t have time to come in.

Now nobody ever reports that. But that’s why we did it quickly.

Now, if I would’ve done it a month, everything would’ve been perfect. The problem is we would’ve wasted a lot of time, and maybe a lot of lives because a lot of bad people would’ve come into our country.

Now in the meantime, we’re vetting very, very strongly. Very, very strongly. But we need help. And we need help by getting that executive order passed.

Yes? Go ahead.

Well I told you, Gen. Flynn obviously was dealing. So that’s one person. But he was dealing, as he should have been.

No. Nobody that I know of. Nobody...

Look, look, look...

How many times do I have to answer this question?

I know you have to get up and ask a question. It’s so important.

Russia is a ruse. I have nothing to do with Russia. Haven’t made a phone call to Russia in years. Don’t speak to people from Russia. Not that I wouldn’t. I just have nobody to speak to.

I spoke to Putin twice. He called me on the election. I told you this. And he called me on the inauguration, a few days ago.

We had a very good talk, especially the second one, lasted for a pretty long period of time. I’m sure you probably get it because it was classified. So I’m sure everybody in this room perhaps has it. But we had a very, very good talk.

I have nothing to do with Russia. To the best of my knowledge no person that I deal with does.

Now, Manafort has totally denied it. He denied it. Now people knew that he was a consultant over in that part of the world for a while, but not for Russia. I think he represented Ukraine or people having to do with Ukraine, or people that — whoever. But people knew that. Everybody knew that.

You know what? He said no. I could only tell you what he — now he was replaced long before the election. You know that, right?

He was replaced long before the election. When all of this stuff started coming out, it came out during the election. But Paul Manafort, who’s a good man also by the way, Paul Manfort was replaced long before the election took place. He was only there for a short period of time.

How much longer should we stay here, folks?

Five more minutes. Is that OK? Five?

Wait. Let’s see. Who’s — I want to find a friendly reporter.

Are you a friendly reporter? Watch how friendly he is. Wait. Wait. Watch how friendly he is. Go ahead.

Go ahead.

Because (OFF-MIKE). However, what we’ve already heard about and what we (OFF-MIKE) is (OFF-MIKE) so you’re general forecast (ph) like 48 (OFF-MIKE). There are people who are everything (ph) happens through their packs (ph) is one of the (OFF-MIKE)...

..he said he was gonna ask a very simple, easy question. And it’s not, its not, not — not a simple question, not a fair question. OK sit down, I understand the rest of your question.

So here’s the story, folks. Number one, I am the least anti- Semitic person that you’ve ever seen in your entire life. Number two, racism, the least racist person. In fact, we did very well relative to other people running as a Republican — quiet, quiet, quiet.

See, he lied about — he was gonna get up and ask a very straight, simple question, so you know, welcome to the world of the media. But let me just tell you something, that I hate the charge, I find it repulsive.

I hate even the question because people that know me and you heard the prime minister, you heard Ben Netanyahu (ph) yesterday, did you hear him, Bibi? He said, I’ve known Donald Trump for a long time and then he said, forget it.

So you should take that instead of having to get up and ask a very insulting question like that.

Yeah, go ahead. Go ahead.

See, it just shows you about the press, but that’s the way the press is.

Yeah.

It’s a very fair question.

Right.

We’re gonna show great heart, DACA is a very, very difficult subject for me, I will tell you. To me, it’s one of the most difficult subjects I have because you have these incredible kids.

In many cases, not in all cases. And some of the cases, having DACA and they’re gang members and they’re drug dealers, too. But you have some absolutely, incredible kids, I would say mostly. They were brought here in such a way — it’s a very — it’s a very, very tough subject.

We’re gonna deal with DACA with heart. I have to deal with a lot of politicians, don’t forget and I have to convince them that what I’m saying is — is right. And I appreciate your understanding on that.

But the DACA situation is a very, very — it’s a very difficult thing for me because you know, I love these kids, I love kids, I have kids and grandkids. And I find it very, very hard doing what the law says exactly to do and you know, the law is rough.

I’m not talking about new laws, I’m talking the existing law, is very rough, it’s very, very rough. As far as the new order, the new order is going to be very much tailored to the what I consider to be a very bad decision.

But we can tailor the order to that decision and get just about everything, in some ways, more. But we’re tailoring it now to the decision, we have some of the best lawyers in the country working on it.

And the new executive order, is being tailored to the decision we got down from the court. OK?

(CROSSTALK

Yes.

Now, that’s what I call a nice question. That is very — who are you with?

Good, I’m gonna start watching, all right? Thank you very much. Melania’s terrific, she was here last night, we had dinner with Senator Rubio and his wife who is by the way, lovely.

And we had a really good discussion about Cuba because we have very similar views on Cuba. And Cuba was very good to me in the Florida election, as you know the Cuban Americans. And I think that Melania’s gonna be outstanding, that’s right, she just opened up the visitors center, in other words, touring of the White House.

She, like others that she’s working with, feel very, very strongly about women’s issue, women’s difficulties. Very, very strongly, she’s a very, very strong advocate. I think she’s a great representative for this country.

And a funny thing happens, because she gets — she gets so unfairly — Melania, the things they say. I’ve known her for a long time, she was a very successful person, she was a very successful model. She did really well.

She would go home at night and didn’t even want to go out with people. She was a very private person. She was always the highest quality that you’ll ever find. And the things they say — I’ve known her for a long time — the things they say are so unfair. And actually, she’s been apologized to, as you know, by various media because they said things that were lies.

I’ll just tell you this. I think she’s going to be a fantastic first lady. She’s going to be a tremendous representative of women and of the people. And helping her and working her will be Ivanka, who is a fabulous person and a fabulous, fabulous woman. And they’re not doing this for money.

They’re not doing this for pay, they’re doing this because they feel it; both of them. And Melania goes back and forth and after Barron finishes school — because it’s hard to take a child out of school with a few months left — she and Barron will be moving over to the White House. OK, thank you, that’s a very nice question.

Go ahead

Yes, oh, this is going to be a bad question, but that’s OK.

Good, because I enjoy watching you on television. Go ahead.

Fix the inner cities.

Yep.

That was very professional and very good.

We’ll be announcing the order in a little while and I’d rather let the order speak for itself. But it could be something that I think that will be very good for everybody concerned. But we’ll talk to you about that after we do the announcement. As far as the inner cities, as you know, I was very strong on the inner cities during the campaign.

I think it’s probably what got me a much higher percentage of the African American vote than a lot of people thought I was going to get. We did, you know, much higher than people thought I was going to get. And I was honored by that, including the Hispanic vote, which was also much higher.

And by the way, if I might add, including the women’s vote, which was much higher than people thought I was going to get. So, we are going to be working very hard on the inner cities, having to do with education, having to do with crime. We’re going to try and fix as quickly as possible — you know, it takes a long time.

It’s taken more a hundred years and more for some of these places to evolve and they evolved, many of them, very badly. But we’re going to be working very hard on health and healthcare, very, very hard on education, and also we’re going to be working in a stringent way, in a very good way, on crime.

You go to some of these inner city places and it’s so sad when you look at the crime. You have people — and I’ve seen this, and I’ve sort of witnessed it — in fact, in two cases I have actually witnessed it. They lock themselves into apartments, petrified to even leave, in the middle of the day.

They’re living in hell. We can’t let that happen. So, we’re going to be very, very strong. That’s a great question and — and it’s a — it’s a very difficult situation because it’s been many, many years. It’s been festering for many, many years. But we have places in this country that we have to fix.

We have to help African American people that, for the most part, are stuck there. Hispanic American people. We have Hispanic American people that are in the inner cities and their living in hell. I mean, you look at the numbers in Chicago. There are two Chicagos, as you know.

There’s one Chicago that’s incredible, luxurious and all — and safe. There’s another Chicago that’s worse than almost any of the places in the Middle East that we talk, and that you talk about, every night on the newscasts. So, we’re going to do a lot of work on the inner cities.

I have great people lined up to help with the inner cities. OK?

Am I going to include who?

Well, I would. I tell you what, do you want to set up the meeting?

Do you want to set up the meeting?

Are they friends of yours?

Well, then(ph) set up the meeting.

Let’s go set up a meeting. I would love to meet with the Black Caucus. I think it’s great, the Congressional Black Caucus. I think it’s great. I actually thought I had a meeting with Congressman Cummings and he was all excited. And then he said, well, I can’t move, it might be bad for me politically. I can’t have that meeting.

I was all set to have the meeting. You know, we called him and called him. And he was all set. I spoke to him on the phone, very nice guy.

He wanted it, but we called, called, called and can’t make a meeting with him. Every day I walk and say I would like to meet with him because I do want to solve the problem. But he probably was told by Schumer or somebody like that, some other lightweight. He was probably told — he was probably told “don’t meet with Trump. It’s bad politics.”

And that’s part of the problem in this country. OK, one more.

No, no, one question. Two we can’t handle. This room can’t handle two. Go ahead, give me the better of your two.

...And some of it — can I be honest with you? And this has to do with racism and horrible things that are put up. Some of it written by our opponents. You do know that. Do you understand that? You don’t think anybody would do a thing like that. Some of the signs you’ll see are not put up by the people that love or like Donald Trump, they’re put up by the other side and you think it’s like playing it straight?

No. But you have some of those signs and some of that anger is caused by the other side. They’ll do signs and they’ll do drawings that are inappropriate. It won’t be my people. It will be the people on the other side to anger people like you. OK.

Go ahead, go ahead.

Who is that? Where is that?

Oh, I’m working on it. I’m working on it very — no, no, look. Hey, just so you understand, we had a totally divided country for eight years and long before that. In all fairness to President Obama, long before President Obama we have had a very divided — I didn’t come along and divide this country. This country was seriously divided before I got here.

We’re going to work on it very hard. One of the questions I was asked, I thought it was a very good question was about the inner cities. I mean, that’s part of it. But we’re going to work on education, we’re going to work on — you know, we’re going to stop — we’re going to try and stop the crime. We have great law enforcement officials, we’re going to try and stop crime.

We’re not going to try and stop, we’re going to stop crime. But it’s very important to me — but this isn’t Donald Trump that divided a nation. We went eight years with President Obama and we went many years before President Obama. We lived in a divided nation. And I am going to try — I will do everything within my power to fix that. I want to thank everybody very much.

Thank you very much. This is — great to be with people I truly feel comfortable with. Please sit down. They’ll say I didn’t get a standing ovation because they never sat down. And I say, I got one standing ovation because they never sat down. 

But I want to thank you. I have great, great love for what you do and the way you do it. And when I’m with the police chiefs and I’m with the sheriffs of our country — and these are the big ones. These are the really big ones. I just want to thank you very much. And I thought before I spoke about what we’re really here to speak about, I would read something to you. Because you can be a lawyer, or you don’t have to be a lawyer; if you were a good student in high school or a bad student in high school, you can understand this. 

And it’s really incredible to me that we have a court case that’s going on so long. As you know, in Boston, we won it with a highly respected judge and a very strong opinion, but now we’re in an era that, let’s just say, they are interpreting things differently than probably 100 percent of the people in this room. I’d like to almost know, does anybody disagree when I read this.

 

But I’m going to read what’s in dispute, what’s in question. And you will see this — it’s INA 212(f) 8 U.S.C. 1182(f): “Suspension of entry or imposition of restrictions by the President” — okay, now, this isn’t just me, this is for Obama, for Ronald Reagan, for the President. And this was done, very importantly, for security — something you people know more about than all of us. It was done for the security of our nation, the security of our citizens, so that people come in who aren’t going to do us harm.

And that’s why it was done. And it couldn’t have been written any more precisely. It’s not like, oh, gee, we wish it were written better. It was written beautifully. So just listen, here’s what it says. This is what they’re arguing: 

"Whenever the President finds that the entry of any aliens" — okay, the entry, the entry of any aliens — "or of any class of aliens" — so any aliens, any class of aliens — "into the United States" — so the entry of people into the United States. Let’s say, just to be precise, of aliens into the United States. 

So any time — "whenever the President finds that the entry of any alien or any class of aliens into the United States would be detrimental to the interests of the United States" — right? So if I find, as President, that a person or group of people will be detrimental to the interests of the United States — and certainly there’s lots of examples that we have, but you shouldn’t even have them, necessarily — he may be — and "he may by proclamation, and for such period as he shall deem necessary…" Now, the only mistake is they should have said "he or she." But hopefully, it won’t be a she for at least another seven years. After that, I’m all — (laughter and applause.) See? I just noticed that, actually. I just noticed it. I’m saying, whoa, this is not politically correct. It’s correct, but it’s not politically correct, you know, this is the old days.

He may by proclamation and for such period as he shall deem necessary — so here it is, people coming in — suspend the entry of all aliens. Right? That’s what it says. It’s not like — again, a bad high school student would understand this. Anybody would understand this. Suspend the entry of all aliens or any class of aliens as immigrants or nonimmigrants, or impose on the entry of aliens. Okay, so you can suspend the aliens, right? You can suspend the aliens from coming in — very strong — or impose on the entry of aliens any restrictions he may deem to be appropriate.

Okay. So you can suspend, you can put restrictions, you can do whatever you want. And this is for the security of the country — which, again, you’re the chiefs, you’re the sheriffs. You understand this. 

And I listened to lawyers on both sides last night, and they were talking about things that had just nothing to do with it. I listened to a panel of judges, and I’ll comment on that — I will not comment on the statements made by certainly one judge. But I have to be honest that if these judges wanted to, in my opinion, help the court in terms of respect for the court, they'd what they should be doing. I mean, it’s so sad. 

They should be — when you read something so simple and so beautifully written, and so perfectly written — other than the one statement, of course, having to do with he or she — but when you read something so perfectly written and so clear to anybody, and then you have lawyers and you watched — I watched last night in amazement, and I heard things that I couldn’t believe, things that really had nothing to do with what I just read. 

And I don’t ever want to call a court biased, so I won’t call it biased. And we haven’t had a decision yet. But courts seem to be so political, and it would be so great for our justice system if they would be able to read a statement and do what’s right. And that has to do with the security of our country, which is so important.

Right now, we are at risk because of what happened. General Kelly is an extremely talented man and a very good man — now Secretary Kelly, Homeland Security. We are doing our job. He’s a great man.  We’re doing our job. And one of the reasons you probably heard that we did it so quickly — in fact, I said, let’s give a one-month notice, and then law enforcement — and General Kelly was so great because he said, we totally knew about it. We knew about everything. We do things well. We did things right.

But the law enforcement people said to me, oh, you can’t give a notice, because if you give a notice that you’re going to be really tough in one month from now, or in one week from now — I suggested a month and I said, well, what about a week? They said, no, you can’t do that, because then people are going to pour in before the toughness goes on. Do you people agree? I mean, you know more about law than anybody, law enforcement.  

So I wanted to give, like, a month. Then I said, well, what about a week? They said, well, then you’re going to have a whole pile of people perhaps — perhaps — with very evil intentions coming in before the restrictions. 

So there it is, folks. It’s as plain as you can have it. I didn’t — and I was a good student. I understand things. I comprehend very well, okay? Better than I think almost anybody. And I want to tell you, I listened to a bunch of stuff last night on television that was disgraceful. It was disgraceful. Because what I just read to you is what we have, and it just can’t be written any plainer or better. And for us to be going through this — and, by the way, a highly, highly respected judge in Boston ruled very strongly in our favour. You heard that.

In fact, I said to my people, why don’t you use the Boston case? And there were reasons why they couldn’t use the Boston case. This one came later for various reasons. But use the Boston case. And I won’t read that, but there were statements made by that judge — who, again, highly respected — that were right on. They were perfect. They were perfect.

So I think it’s sad. I think it’s a sad day. I think our security is at risk today. And it will be at risk until such time as we are entitled and get what we are entitled to as citizens of this country. As chiefs, as sheriffs of this country, we want security. 

One of the reasons I was elected was because of law and order and security. It’s one of the reasons I was elected. Also jobs and lots of other things. But I think one of the strongest reasons is security. And they’re taking away our weapons one by one, that’s what they’re doing. And you know it and I know it, and you people have been very unhappy for a long period of time. And I can read the polls maybe better than anybody because it seems that I understood the polls a lot better than many of the pollsters understood the polls — assuming they were honest polls, which I think probably many of them weren’t. I really believe that.   

But we need security in our country. We have to allow you folks to do your job. You’re great people, great people. Great men and women. And we have to allow you to do your job. And we have to give you the weapons that you need. And this is a weapon that you need. And they’re trying to take it away from you, maybe because of politics or maybe because of political views. We can’t let that happen.

So with that, let’s get on to business, right? It’s really something. Thank you.  

I want to thank Sheriff Sandra Hutchens and Chief Tom Manger for your leadership and, frankly, for the service. You have had great service. Everyone has told me about you two legendary people. All of us here today are united by one shared mission: to serve and protect the public of the United States.

During my campaign for President, I had the chance to spend time with law enforcement officials all across our country. They are the most incredible people you will ever meet. And I just wanted to say to all of them right now, from the bottom of my heart, thank you, thank you, thank you.  

There are many actions we in the federal government can take to help improve safety in your communities. But I believe that community safety begins with moral leadership. Our police officers, sheriffs and deputies risk their lives every day. And they’re entitled to an administration that has their back.  

The first step in restoring public safety is affirming our confidence in the men and women charged with upholding our laws. And I’m going to add justices, judges in that category. And I’m very proud to have picked Judge Gorsuch, who I think is going to be an outstanding member of the Supreme Court — outstanding.  

So I’d like to begin my remarks with a declaration issued to all of you, and delivered to every member of the law enforcement community all across the United States. My message today is that you have a true, true friend in the White House. You have.  I stand with you. I support our police. I support our sheriffs. And we support the men and women of law enforcement.  

Right now, many communities in America are facing a public safety crisis. Murders in 2015 experienced their largest single-year increase in nearly half a century. In 2016, murders in large cities continued to climb by double digits. In many of our biggest cities, 2016 brought an increase in the number of homicides, rapes, assaults and shootings. In Chicago, more than 4,000 people were shot last year alone, and the rate so far this year has been even higher. What is going on in Chicago? 

We cannot allow this to continue. We’ve allowed too many young lives to be claimed — and you see that, you see that all over — claimed by gangs, and too many neighborhoods to be crippled by violence and fear. Sixty percent of murder victims under the age of 22 are African American. This is a national tragedy, and it requires national action. This violence must end, and we must all work together to end it.

Whether a child lives in Detroit, Chicago, Baltimore, or anywhere in our country, he or she has the right to grow up in safety and in peace. No one in America should be punished because of the city where he or she is born. Every child in America should be able to play outside without fear, walk home without danger, and attend a school without being worried about drugs or gangs or violence.

So many lives and so many people have been cut short. Their potential, their life has been cut short. So much potential has been sidelined. And so many dreams have been shattered and broken, totally broken. It’s time to stop the drugs from pouring into our country. And, by the way, we will do that. And I will say this: General, now Secretary, Kelly will be the man to do it, and we will give him a wall. And it will be a real wall.  And a lot of things will happen very positively for your cities, your states, believe me. The wall is getting designed right now. A lot of people say, oh, oh, Trump was only kidding with the wall. I wasn’t kidding. I don’t kid. I don’t kid. I watch this, and they say I was kidding. No, I don’t kid. I don’t kid about things like that, I can tell you. No, we will have a wall. It will be a great wall, and it will do a lot of — will be a big help. Just ask Israel about walls. Do walls work? Just ask Israel. They work — if it’s properly done. 

It’s time to dismantle the gangs terrorizing our citizens, and it’s time to ensure that every young American can be raised in an environment of decency, dignity, love and support. You have asked for the resources, tools and support you need to get the job done. We will do whatever we can to help you meet those demands. That includes a zero tolerance policy for acts of violence against law enforcement.  We all see what happens. We all see what happens and what’s been happening to you. It’s not fair. 

We must protect those who protect us. The number of officers shot and killed in the line of duty last year increased by 56 percent from the year before. Last year, in Dallas, police officers were targeted for execution –- think of this. Who ever heard of this? They were targeted for execution. Twelve were shot and five were killed. These heroic officers died as they lived -– protecting the innocent, rushing into danger, risking their lives for people they did not even know, but for people that they were determined to save. Hats off to you people.

These slain officers are an eternal monument to all of the men and women who protect our streets and serve our public. We will not forget them, and we will not forget all of the others who made that final sacrifice in the line of duty.

God has blessed our nation to put these heroes among us. Those who serve in law enforcement work long hours. You work long hours. I know so many sheriffs, so many chiefs, so many police who work long hours and dangerous hours, oftentimes in difficult conditions and for not that much pay relative to what you’re doing. They do it because they care. 

We must work with them, not against them. They’re working against you. For many years they’ve been working against you. We must support them, not undermine them. And instead of division and disunity — and which is so much disunity — we must build bridges of partnership and of trust. Those who demonize law enforcement or who use the actions of a few to discredit the service of many are hurting the very people they say that they want to help. When policing is reduced, crime is increased, and our poorest citizens suffer the most. And I see it all the time. When the number of police goes down, crime goes up.

To build needed trust between law enforcement and the communities they serve, it is not enough for us to merely talk to each other. We must listen to each other. All of us share the view that those in uniform must be held to the highest possible standard of conduct — so important. 

You're the role models to young Americans all across this country, many of whom want to go into law enforcement, many of whom want to be a sheriff or a police chief, many of whom — they have great respect for you. Tremendous respect. You don't even realize it, but I will tell you, they have great respect and admiration for the people in this room and the people that you represent. And don't let anyone ever tell you different. Don't let the dishonest media try and convince you that it's different than that, because it's not.   

That is why our commitment to law and law enforcement also includes ensuring that we are giving departments the resources they need to train, recruit and retain talent. As part of our commitment to safe communities, we will also work to address the mental health crisis. Prisons should not be a substitute for treatment. We will fight to increase access to life-saving treatment to battle the addiction to drugs, which is afflicting our nation like never ever before — ever.   

I've been here two weeks. I've met a lot of law enforcement officials. Yesterday, I brought them into the Oval Office. I asked a group, what impact do drugs have in terms of a percentage on crime? They said, 75 to 80 percent. That's pretty sad. We're going to stop the drugs from pouring in. We're going to stop those drugs from poisoning our youth, from poisoning our people. We're going to be ruthless in that fight. We have no choice.

And we're going to take that fight to the drug cartels and work to liberate our communities from their terrible grip of violence. You have the power and knowledge to tell General Kelly — now Secretary Kelly — who the illegal immigrant gang members are. Now, you have that power because you know them, you're there, you're local. You know the illegals, you know them by their first name, you know them by their nicknames. You have that power. The federal government can never be that precise. But you're in the neighborhoods — you know the bad ones, you know the good ones. 

I want you to turn in the bad ones. Call Secretary Kelly's representatives and we'll get them out of our country and bring them back where they came from, and we'll do it fast. You have to call up the federal government, Homeland Security, because so much of the problems — you look at Chicago and you look at other places. So many of the problems are caused by gang members, many of whom are not even legally in our country.

And we will work with you on the frontlines to keep America safe from terrorism, which is what I began this with. Terrorism — a tremendous threat, far greater than people in our country understand. Believe me. I've learned a lot in the last two weeks. And terrorism is a far greater threat than the people of our country understand. But we're going to take care of it. We're going to win. We're going to take care of it, folks.

Let today be the beginning of a great national partnership. Let today serve as a great call to action. And let this moment represent a new beginning in relations between law enforcement and our communities. I want you to know the American public totally stands with you. I want you to know the American people support you. I want you to know how proud we are, truly proud, to know you. 

We applaud your efforts. We thank you for your service. And we promise that you will always find an open door at the White House — an open invitation to our great cops and sheriffs nationwide. They're great people. You are great people.

Well, I want to thank everybody.  Very, very special people.  And it is true, this is my first stop, officially.  We’re not talking about the balls, or we’re not talking about even the speeches -- although they did treat me nicely on that speech yesterday.    I always call them the dishonest media, but they treated me nicely.   

But I want to say that there is nobody that feels stronger about the intelligence community and the CIA than Donald Trump.  There’s nobody.   

The wall behind me is very, very special.  We’ve been touring for quite a while, and I’ll tell you what -- 29?  I can’t believe it.

 Oh, 28.  We got to reduce it.  That’s amazing.  And we really appreciate what you’ve done in terms of showing us something very special.  And your whole group, these are really special, amazing people.  Very, very few people could do the job you people do.  And I want to just let you know, I am so behind you.  And I know maybe sometimes you haven’t gotten the backing that you’ve wanted, and you’re going to get so much backing.  Maybe you’re going to say, please don’t give us so much backing.    Mr. President, please, we don’t need that much backing.    But you’re going to have that.  And I think everybody in this room knows it.

You know, the military and the law enforcement, generally speaking, but all of it -- but the military gave us tremendous percentages of votes.  We were unbelievably successful in the election with getting the vote of the military.  And probably almost everybody in this room voted for me, but I will not ask you to raise your hands if you did.    But I would guarantee a big portion, because we’re all on the same wavelength, folks.    We’re all on the same wavelength, right?  He knows.  It took Brian about 30 seconds to figure that one out, right, because we know we’re on the same wavelength.

But we’re going to do great things.  We’re going to do great things.  We’ve been fighting these wars for longer than any wars we’ve ever fought.  We have not used the real abilities that we have.  We’ve been restrained.  We have to get rid of ISIS.  Have to get rid of ISIS.  We have no choice.    Radical Islamic terrorism.  And I said it yesterday -- it has to be eradicated just off the face of the Earth.  This is evil.  This is evil.  And you know, I can understand the other side.  We can all understand the other side.  There can be wars between countries, there can be wars.  You can understand what happened.  This is something nobody can even understand.  This is a level of evil that we haven’t seen.  And you’re going to go to it, and you’re going to do a phenomenal job.  But we’re going to end it.  It’s time.  It’s time right now to end it.

You have somebody coming on who is extraordinary.  For the different positions of “Secretary of This” and “Secretary of That” and all of these great positions, I’d see five, six, seven, eight people.  And we had a great transition.  We had an amazing team of talent.  And, by the way, General Flynn is right over here.  Put up your hand.  What a good guy.    And Reince and my whole group.  Reince -- you know -- they don’t care about Reince.  He’s like this political guy that turned out to be a superstar, right?  We don’t have to talk about Reince.

But we did -- we had such a tremendous, tremendous success.  So when I’m interviewing all of these candidates that Reince and his whole group is putting in front, it went very, very quickly, and, in this case, went so quickly -- because I would see six or seven or eight for Secretary of Agriculture, who we just named the other day, Sonny Perdue, former governor of Georgia.  Fantastic guy.  But I’d see six, seven, eight people for a certain position.  Everybody wanted it. 

But I met Mike Pompeo, and it was the only guy I met.  I didn’t want to meet anybody else.  I said, cancel everybody else.  Cancel.  Now, he was approved, essentially, but they’re doing little political games with me.  He was one of the three.  Now, last night, as you know, General Mattis, fantastic guy, and General Kelly got approved.    And Mike Pompeo was supposed to be in that group.  It was going to be the three of them.  Can you imagine all of these guys?  People respect -- you know, they respect that military sense.  All my political people, they’re not doing so well.  The political people aren’t doing so well but you.  We’re going to get them all through, but some will take a little bit longer than others. 

But Mike was literally -- I had a group of -- what, we had nine different people?  Now, I must say, I didn’t mind cancelling eight appointments.  That wasn’t the worst thing in the world.  But I met him and I said, he is so good.  Number one in his class at West Point. 

Now, I know a lot about West Point.  I’m a person that very strongly believes in academics.  In fact, every time I say I had an uncle who was a great professor at MIT for 35 years who did a fantastic job in so many different ways, academically -- was an academic genius -- and then they say, is Donald Trump an intellectual?  Trust me, I’m like a smart persona.    And I recognized immediately.  So he was number one at West Point, and he was also essentially number one at Harvard Law School.  And then he decided to go into the military.  And he ran for Congress.  And everything he’s done has been a homerun.  People like him, but much more importantly to me, everybody respects him.  And when I told Paul Ryan that I wanted to do this, I would say he may be the only person that was not totally thrilled -- right, Mike?  Because he said, I don’t want to lose this guy. 

But you will be getting a total star.  You’re going to be getting a total gem.  He’s a gem.    You’ll see.  You’ll see.  And many of you know him anyway.  But you’re going to see.  And again, we have some great people going in.  But this one is something -- is going to be very special, because this is one, if I had to name the most important, this would certainly be perhaps -- you know, in certain ways, you could say my most important.  You do the job like everybody in this room is capable of doing.  And the generals are wonderful, and the fighting is wonderful.  But if you give them the right direction, boy, does the fighting become easier.  And, boy, do we lose so fewer lives, and win so quickly.  And that’s what we have to do.  We have to start winning again.

You know, when I was young and when I was -- of course, I feel young.  I feel like I’m 30, 35, 39.    Somebody said, are you young?  I said, I think I’m young.  You know, I was stopping -- when we were in the final month of that campaign, four stops, five stops, seven stops.  Speeches, speeches, in front of 25,000, 30,000 people, 15,000, 19,000 from stop to stop.  I feel young.

When I was young -- and I think we’re all sort of young.  When I was young, we were always winning things in this country.  We’d win with trade.  We’d win with wars.  At a certain age, I remember hearing from one of my instructors, “The United States has never lost a war.”  And then, after that, it’s like we haven’t won anything.  We don’t win anymore.  The old expression, “to the victor belong the spoils” -- you remember.  I always used to say, keep the oil.  I wasn’t a fan of Iraq.  I didn’t want to go into Iraq.  But I will tell you, when we were in, we got out wrong.  And I always said, in addition to that, keep the oil.  Now, I said it for economic reasons.  But if you think about it, Mike, if we kept the oil you probably wouldn’t have ISIS because that’s where they made their money in the first place.  So we should have kept the oil.  But okay.    Maybe you’ll have another chance.  But the fact is, should have kept the oil. 

I believe that this group is going to be one of the most important groups in this country toward making us safe, toward making us winners again, toward ending all of the problems.  We have so many problems that are interrelated that we don’t even think of, but interrelated to the kind of havoc and fear that this sick group of people has caused.  So I can only say that I am with you 1,000 percent. 

And the reason you’re my first stop is that, as you know, I have a running war with the media.  They are among the most dishonest human beings on Earth.  (Laughter and applause.)  And they sort of made it sound like I had a feud with the intelligence community.  And I just want to let you know, the reason you’re the number-one stop is exactly the opposite -- exactly.  And they understand that, too. 

And I was explaining about the numbers.  We did a thing yesterday at the speech.  Did everybody like the speech?    I’ve been given good reviews.  But we had a massive field of people.  You saw them.  Packed.  I get up this morning, I turn on one of the networks, and they show an empty field.  I say, wait a minute, I made a speech.  I looked out, the field was -- it looked like a million, million and a half people.  They showed a field where there were practically nobody standing there.  And they said, Donald Trump did not draw well.  I said, it was almost raining, the rain should have scared them away, but God looked down and he said, we’re not going to let it rain on your speech. 

In fact, when I first started, I said, oh, no.  The first line, I got hit by a couple of drops.  And I said, oh, this is too bad, but we’ll go right through it.  But the truth is that it stopped immediately.  It was amazing.  And then it became really sunny.  And then I walked off and it poured right after I left.  It poured.  But, you know, we have something that’s amazing because we had -- it looked -- honestly, it looked like a million and a half people.  Whatever it was, it was.  But it went all the way back to the Washington Monument.  And I turn on -- and by mistake I get this network, and it showed an empty field.  And it said we drew 250,000 people.  Now, that’s not bad, but it’s a lie.  We had 250,000 people literally around -- you know, in the little bowl that we constructed.  That was 250,000 people.  The rest of the 20-block area, all the way back to the Washington Monument, was packed.  So we caught them, and we caught them in a beauty.  And I think they’re going to pay a big price. 

We had another one yesterday, which was interesting.  In the Oval Office there’s a beautiful statue of Dr. Martin Luther King.  And I also happen to like Churchill, Winston Churchill.  I think most of us like Churchill.  He doesn’t come from our country, but had a lot to do with it.  Helped us; real ally.  And, as you know, the Churchill statue was taken out -- the bust.  And as you also probably have read, the Prime Minister is coming over to our country very shortly.  And they wanted to know whether or not I’d like it back.  I say, absolutely, but in the meantime we have a bust of Churchill. 

So a reporter for Time magazine -- and I have been on there cover, like, 14 or 15 times.  I think we have the all-time record in the history of Time Magazine.  Like, if Tom Brady is on the cover, it’s one time, because he won the Super Bowl or something, right?    I’ve been on it for 15 times this year.  I don’t think that’s a record, Mike, that can ever be broken.  Do you agree with that?  What do you think? 

But I will say that they said -- it was very interesting -- that Donald Trump took down the bust, the statue, of Dr. Martin Luther King.  And it was right there.  But there was a cameraman that was in front of it.    So Zeke -- Zeke from Time Magazine writes a story about I took down.  I would never do that because I have great respect for Dr. Martin Luther King.  But this is how dishonest the media is.

Now, the big story -- the retraction was, like, where?  Was it a line?  Or do they even bother putting it in?  So I only like to say that because I love honesty.  I like honest reporting. 

I will tell you, final time -- although I will say it, when you let in your thousands of other people that have been trying to come in -- because I am coming back -- we’re going to have to get you a larger room.    We may have to get you a larger room.  You know?  And maybe, maybe, it will be built by somebody that knows how to build, and we won’t have columns.    You understand that?    We get rid of the columns.

No, I just wanted to really say that I love you, I respect you.  There’s nobody I respect more.  You’re going to do a fantastic job.  And we’re going to start winning again, and you’re going to be leading the charge. 
